[DOCUMENT METADATA]
Title: Association of Antidiabetic Medication Classes With Survival Outcomes in Pulmonary Hypertension Patients With Diabetes
Year: 2026
Type: research_article
Drugs: metformin, pioglitazone, rosiglitazone
Keywords: diabetes mellitus, insulin, metabolism, metformin, pulmonary hypertension, survival, thiazolidinediones
Domain: Type 2 Diabetes Drug Interactions
[END METADATA]

[SECTION: ABSTRACT]
ABSTRACT Pulmonary hypertension (PH) and diabetes frequently coexist, and metabolic dysregulation plays a role in PH pathogenesis. While preclinical studies indicate that certain antidiabetic therapies may beneficially impact the pulmonary vasculature and right heart function in PH, clinical data remain limited. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of veterans with PH and diabetes using Veterans Health Affairs data (2003–2015). The associations between exposure to antidiabetic medications at the time of PH diagnosis and survival were analyzed using Cox proportional hazards regression. We identified 41,670 veterans with PH and diabetes, largely older men (median age 69, 97% male). Average survival from PH diagnosis was 3.5 years. After adjustment for demographics, comorbid conditions, renal function, and hemoglobin A1c, metformin and thiazolidinedione (TZD) exposure were associated with lower mortality (HR 0.828, 95% CI 0.799–0.857 and HR 0.838, 95% CI 0.793–0.885, respectively). Conversely, insulin use was associated with higher mortality. These associations remained consistent across multiple analytical approaches and were independent of baseline hemoglobin A1c levels. Interactions were observed between drug effects and both renal function and PH comorbidities, with metformin's protective effect enhanced in patients with lower eGFR but attenuated in those with lung disease. In conclusion, metformin and TZD use were associated with improved survival in veterans with PH and diabetes, while insulin use was associated with reduced survival. These findings suggest that metabolic modulation may represent a viable therapeutic strategy in PH, though could be context dependent. Prospective trials are needed to evaluate therapeutic approaches targeting the metabolic pathobiology of PH.

[SECTION: INTRODUCTION]
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is defined as an elevation of pulmonary vascular pressures which eventually can exceed the ability of the right ventricle (RV) to adapt, leading to RV failure and death. A variety of underlying conditions lead to PH which greatly impacts its manifestations, trajectory, and management options. Because of this heterogenous nature of PH, the World Symposium on PH (WSPH) separates the condition into five Groups based on shared features: Group 1 pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), Group 2 PH due to left heart disease, Group 3 PH due to lung diseases and hypoxia, Group 4 PH due to pulmonary artery obstructions, and Group 5 PH from multifactorial and miscellaneous causes [ 1 ]. These groupings are imprecise at best, and studies have shown that patients often have conditions that predispose to more than one “Group” of PH. For example, in the PVDOMICS study, an initiative to characterize the spectrum of PH using deep phenotyping, 40% of participants with PH had contributing conditions from more than one of the traditional PH Groups, often overlap between Groups 1, 2, and 3 PH [ 2 ]. Presence of common respiratory, left heart, and metabolic conditions have well‐recognized adverse impacts on mortality in PH [ 2 ,  3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 ,  7 ], underscoring the need for management approaches to patients with these conditions in particular. Even in the best‐case scenario for treatment—Group 1 PAH—available therapies except for activin signaling inhibitors do little to target underlying PH pathogenesis [ 8 ,  9 ].
Current evidence suggests that PH pathogenesis involves abnormal energy metabolism, including impaired glucose and lipid handling in the RV and pulmonary vasculature, and tissues outside the cardiopulmonary system [ 10 ,  11 ,  12 ,  13 ]. Furthermore, diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common comorbidity in PH. In prior work using national Veterans Health Administration data, we found that more than one‐third of veterans with PH had co‐existing DM, and that DM was associated with higher risk of death [ 7 ]. Interestingly, the excess mortality risk associated with DM was only partially explained by traditional diabetic complications such as chronic kidney disease (CKD), stroke, and cardiovascular disease. This suggests that other DM‐associated mechanisms, potentially related to pulmonary vascular, RV, or metabolic signaling dysfunction may be involved in the enhanced PH mortality among DM patients [ 14 ]. Antidiabetic therapies, such as metformin and thiazolidinediones (TZDs) have beneficial effects on pulmonary vascular remodeling and RV function in pre‐clinical models of PH [ 15 ,  16 ,  17 ]. A prior in silico analysis suggests these drugs counterbalance a network of underlying transcriptional abnormalities associated with PAH [ 18 ]. However, other than a few small studies, the real‐world impacts of antidiabetic therapies in PH remain to be described [ 19 ,  20 ]. Using a large cohort of veterans diagnosed with PH, we evaluated the association between exposure to antidiabetic therapies and survival.

[SECTION: METHODS]
Using data from the Veterans Health Administration Corporate Data Warehouse (VHA CDW), veterans with a diagnosis of PH occurring between 1/1/2003 and 9/30/2015 were identified as previously described [ 21 ]. Briefly, the diagnosis of PH required an ICD‐9 code indicating PH occurring at least once as an inpatient or at least twice separated by ≥ 30 days as an outpatient. A diagnosis of PH was sufficient for inclusion in this retrospective study. While the presence of echocardiogram and right heart catheterization procedures within the VHA is available in CDW, the findings from these procedures are not. Consequently, hemodynamic characterization is not feasible using the data available in VHA CDW. Contributors to PH, including the presence of chronic lung disease and heart failure were identified from diagnoses present at the time of initial PH diagnosis (Supporting Information Table  S1 ).
The presence of DM was defined using a validated method requiring: (1a) ≥ 1 primary care or (1b) ≥ 2 non‐primary care visits with DM diagnosis code(s); and (2) use of antidiabetic medication(s) [ 7 ,  22 ]. Identified DM cases present 6 months after the diagnosis of PH or at any point earlier were included. This means that if, for example, PH was diagnosed first when other comorbid conditions were uncertain, and a diagnosis of DM was rendered within 6 months, the individual was categorized as having DM at their PH baseline. Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) values within 6 months of the PH diagnosis date were collected and the median was used for analyzes. Height and weight measures within 24 months and 6 months, respectively, of PH diagnosis were used to calculate baseline body mass index (BMI) after implausible values were removed (50–600 pounds for weight; 54–93 inches for height).
Presence and severity of renal dysfunction was determined from creatinine values available in the 6 months prior to PH diagnosis and diagnostic and procedural codes for dialysis occurring up to 1 year prior to PH diagnosis. Creatinine values of 0.2–30 mg/dL were included. Each veteran's median baseline creatinine was used to estimate glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) using the 2021 CKD‐EPI equation and stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD) were assigned based on standard cutoffs [ 23 ,  24 ]. For patients with procedural codes indicating the presence of dialysis, an eGFR of zero was imputed and end‐stage renal disease (ESRD) was assumed.
The exposure of interest was receipt of antidiabetic medications in the 180‐day period prior to PH diagnosis. Medication exposure was obtained from sources within VHA CDW. Antidiabetic medications were grouped by drug class and were reported and analyzed as a binary variable (exposed or unexposed) and as the number or proportion of days covered in the 180‐day exposure period. Patients could be exposed to more than one drug class. Because antidiabetic medication exposure was rare among veterans without a listed diagnosis of DM, all analyzes evaluating antidiabetic therapy exposure were performed in the population with PH and DM as described in the Results section.
All‐cause mortality from the time of PH diagnosis was the primary outcome analyzed. Vital status was obtained from VA records in CDW and has been shown to have accuracy compared to the National Death Index [ 25 ]. Survival time began at the date of PH diagnosis. Cases were censored at their last known VA follow up, or at 9/30/2016 if they were not known to be deceased.
Analyzes were performed using R Statistical Software (v4.4.1; R Core Team 2024) [ 26 ]. Summary statistics are reported as median with interquartile range [IQR] for continuous variables, number and proportion for categorical variables, unless otherwise noted. The effect of baseline factors on survival was estimated by the Kaplan‐Meier method and with univariate and multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. Complete cases were included in regression analyzes and imputation was not performed. Several modeling strategies were used. Multivariable Cox regression modeling of survival time was performed for drug class exposure using different sets of covariates. Since patients with DM may be treated with one or more antidiabetic therapies, all models evaluating the effect of exposure to antidiabetic drug class included all other drug classes in the model (except for univariate models), so effects reported are adjusted for the potential exposure to other drug classes. Other predictors were selected to include relevant covariates and confounders known or anticipated to affect survival in patients with PH and/or DM as well as those which may affect selection of antidiabetic therapies. Terms included in each model are provided in the results, including interaction terms if the model included them. Additionally, since choice of antidiabetic therapy may involve multiple, potentially confounding, factors, weighted Cox regression was performed using the  WeightIt  package for  R  [ 27 ]. This was done using two approaches. First, weights were generated as the inverse of probability of treatment (IPT) with a drug class, estimated by logistic regression, using covariates of age, race, gender, BMI, HbA1c value, CKD stage, the presence of pulmonary or cardiac comorbidities that contribute to PH (or both), and exposure to other classes of antidiabetic agents. Separately, weights were generated to specifically balance the same covariates in the cohort between exposed/unexposed persons [ 28 ]. For all models, hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) are provided. For weighted regression, robust standard errors were used to estimate the 95% CI.  p  values less than 0.05 are considered significant. Survival curves stratified by disease and drug exposure were created using the standard Kaplan‐Meier method. Adjusted survival curves for drug exposure categories were created using balancing weights which adjust the population for probability of treatment.

[SECTION: RESULTS]
Approximately 22 million veterans are represented in the VHA CDW during the study period. Of these, 110,564 were identified as having a diagnosis of PH (Figure  1 ) and are described in Table  1  [ 21 ]. Veterans with PH were predominantly male (96.4%,  N  = 106,629), had a median age of 70 years (IQR 62–80), and most were overweight or obese (71.2%,  N  = 78,768). Comorbid diagnoses of heart failure and lung disease were common (71% and 72%, respectively) with 53% of veterans having both heart failure and lung disease. Those with a heart failure diagnosis were more likely to be older (Supporting Information Table  S2 ). Based on an individual's set of comorbidities, these veterans were most likely to have PH related to Group 2 or 3 PH, or have multifactorial PH (Supporting Information Table  S2 ), which was expected in the source population.
Of the cohort with diabetes, the median HbA1c at the time of PH diagnosis was 7.0% (IQR 6.3‐7.9%). Renal dysfunction was common: 37% had CKD 3% and 14% had CKD 4, 5, or ESRD. A majority (64%,  N  = 26,530) had some exposure to insulin with sulfonylureas (44%), metformin (38%), and TZD agents (7.3%) being the next most used drugs (Table  2  and Supporting Information Table  S3 ). Exposure to other antidiabetic drug classes was rare. Each veteran could be exposed to more than one medication class. Renal impairment was less common in those exposed to metformin and more common in those exposed to insulin, likely due to standard practices regarding prescribing of these agents. Likewise, HbA1c levels tended to be higher in those exposed to insulin compared to other drug classes.
The median overall survival for the PH cohort was 3.88 years and was lower in those with versus without diabetes (3.53 vs. 4.13 years, respectively,  p  < 0.001; Table  3  and Figure  2A ). Survival also differed in those with comorbidities contributing to PH. The presence of lung disease, heart disease, or the combination of both comorbidities significantly reduced survival compared to those without such comorbidities (Figure  2B  and Table  4 ). These and other baseline factors were associated with increased risk of death even when adjusting for other factors (Table  5 ).
Among those with PH and DM, the estimated effects of antidiabetic therapy exposure on overall survival using univariate, multivariable, and weighted modeling strategies are summarized in Table  6 , Figure  3 , and Supporting Information Table  4 . All multivariable models included age at PH diagnosis, gender, race, BMI, baseline HbA1c and CKD stage, presence of comorbid heart and/or lung diagnoses, and exposure to other classes of antidiabetic medications. Use of eGFR rather than CKD stage did not appreciably affect any of the estimated effects of other covariates or the variables of interest (results not shown). Continuous variables were included in the models as‐is. Using splines for continuous covariates in these models to allow for the possibility of nonlinear effects did not appreciably alter the estimated effect measures for antidiabetic therapy drug class exposure (results not shown). The associations of non‐medication factors on outcome were comparable to those in the overall PH cohort noted in Table  5 . In this DM cohort, HbA1c measured at baseline was not associated with overall survival after PH diagnosis (Supporting Information Table  4 ).
Both metformin and TZD exposure were associated with lower hazard for death in both univariate and all multivariate analyzes (Table  6 , Figure  3 ). Risk of death from any cause was 15%–20% lower in those exposed to metformin or TZD therapy compared to those unexposed. While sulfonylurea exposure was associated with a slightly lower risk of death in univariate analysis, no difference was observed in analyzes adjusted for other covariates. Insulin exposure was associated with a higher hazard for death, with approximately 25% higher risk in multivariable models. Unadjusted Kaplan‐Meier survival curves (Figure  4 , Supporting Information Figures  1 – 4 ) and curves adjusted for covariates (Figure  5 , Supporting Information Figures  5 – 8 ) demonstrate the improved survival in those exposed to metformin and TZDs, the equivocal survival probability in those exposed to sulfonylureas and poorer survival in those exposed to insulin.
We performed separate analyzes to evaluate the possibility of interaction between antidiabetic exposure and renal function or the presence of co‐existing heart and/or lung disease diagnoses (Supporting Information Table  5 ). In these models assessing interaction, the association of metformin with lower mortality risk was attenuated with lung disease and was enhanced with lower renal function. The higher mortality risk in those exposed to insulin was attenuated by lower levels of renal function. There was no evidence of interaction between these factors and TZD or sulfonylurea exposure though it should be noted that the null effect of sulfonylureas and the small number of patients exposed to TZDs may have reduced our ability to detect interaction.
While the primary analysis included the exposure of interest as a binary variable (exposed or unexposed), we recognize that intensity of exposure likely varied within the study population. Therefore, we also analyzed the effect of each drug class on mortality using exposure to each drug class defined as the number of days covered in the 180 days prior to PH diagnosis (Supporting Information Table  6 ). The associations between intensity of exposure to the antidiabetic drug classes and outcome were similar to our main models. Because these models included non‐users (with their cases having zero days exposed), we also explored whether among those veterans exposed to a drug class (excluding those unexposed), if greater number of days exposed was associated with outcome (Table  6 ). Recognizing that these models included fewer cases, results suggest that each 28 days of additional exposure to metformin was associated with lower risk of mortality, while the cumulative exposure to other medication classes was not significantly associated with outcome.

[SECTION: DISCUSSION]
In this large retrospective study of veterans with PH and DM, we found that metformin and TZD therapy were associated with significantly improved survival, while insulin use was associated with increased mortality. These associations remained robust across multiple analytical approaches controlling for patient‐ and disease‐specific factors. Sulfonylurea exposure had no discernable association with outcome and other classes of antidiabetic therapy were infrequent in this study population.
The most striking finding from our study was a consistent reduction of about 20% in mortality risk associated with metformin use and a similar association, though slightly lower magnitude, with TZD use. The beneficial effect of metformin appears to be influenced by renal function and lung disease, suggesting that benefits may be context dependent. Our finding that HbA1c was not associated with outcome in adjusted models suggests that these therapies' association with outcome may be irrespective of their glycemic effects. This emphasizes the complex interplay between DM and PH pathobiology, known differences in mechanisms of action of antidiabetic medications, and potentially off‐target impacts of these metabolically active therapies.
Our findings cannot confirm causal relationships or determine mechanisms, but prior literature provides significant understanding of dysregulated energy metabolism in PH and RV pathology and may offer clues to pathways relevant to our observations [ 10 ,  12 ]. Mechanistic studies in PH highlight that there is a shift from mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation towards less efficient glycolysis. This metabolic dysregulation, known as the Warburg effect, is associated with reduced cellular fatty acid metabolism, increased proliferation, and apoptosis resistance, all hallmarks of pulmonary vascular remodeling relevant to PH. These metabolic abnormalities have repeatedly been observed in animal models and translational human studies of PH and are known to impact pulmonary vascular wall cells and RV cardiomyocytes [ 10 ,  11 ,  12 ,  29 ,  30 ]. These effects may be particularly consequential for the stressed RV, which is highly dependent on oxidative phosphorylation [ 31 ]. Preclinical evidence supports that certain antidiabetic therapies exert beneficial impacts on pulmonary vascular and RV function in PH through metabolic modulation and potentially other effects independent from their effects on glycemia. Metformin's protective effects are postulated to involve activation of 5′ adenosine monophosphate‐activated kinase (AMPK) signaling. AMPK serves as a master regulator of cellular energy homeostasis and downstream signaling consequences including promotion of oxidative phosphorylation [ 32 ]. In animal models of PAH and PH due to left heart disease, activation of AMPK with metformin improves fatty acid oxidation in target tissues and reduces pulmonary vascular remodeling [ 16 ,  33 ].
Similarly, a major therapeutic mechanism of TZDs (e.g. rosiglitazone or pioglitazone) involves activation of the ligand‐activated nuclear hormone receptor, peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor gamma (PPARγ). Our finding that TZD use is associated with improved survival is consistent with preclinical studies showing that PPARγ agonizts reverse experimental PH [ 17 ]. As an example, in a rat model, pioglitazone reversed established PH through restoration of dysregulated fatty acid oxidation. Multiple other studies have shown beneficial impacts of PPARγ activation in human PAH primary cells and PH animal models [ 15 ,  34 ]. While metformin and TZDs are traditionally considered to have different mechanisms of action, their downstream effects may converge. TZDs through or apart from their interaction with PPARγ activate AMPK, and AMPK activation has been shown to upregulate PPARγ [ 35 ,  36 ,  37 ,  38 ]. This raises the possibility that there is a shared pathway by which metformin and TZDs exert protective effects.
Our statistical models assessing interaction suggest that the positive association of metformin with survival is lessened in patients with lung disease. Chronic hypoxia is known to drive PH through various processes, and it is possible that the metabolic modulation by metformin may be insufficient to prevent maladaptive pulmonary vascular remodeling in some contexts such as chronic hypoxia [ 32 ]. Interestingly, the association of TZDs with improved survival was not attenuated in patients with lung disease, suggesting that TZDs may be of particular interest in patients with Group 3 PH. The association of metformin with survival is increased in patients with lower eGFR, which we speculate could be due to increased drug levels in patients with less effective renal drug clearance [ 39 ]. Notably, our study assessed drug exposure and the amount of time the drug class was available to the individual, but data were not available to assess the impact of drug dose.
Insulin therapy was associated with poorer outcome in our study. While this observation could represent an epiphenomenon due to insulin use in patients with more advanced metabolic disease and potentially at a baseline higher risk of death, there are mechanistic explanations to consider. Insulin promotes lipogenesis and inhibits lipolysis, potentially worsening lipid‐induced end‐organ injury known to play a role in PH [ 40 ]. Alternatively, insulin may promote cellular proliferation and survival pathways, compounding features known to underlie pulmonary vascular remodeling. While our study cannot confirm a causal role for the association between antidiabetic therapy and PH outcome, our observations, the postulated mechanisms, and preclinical studies all align with the concept that correcting underlying dysregulated cellular energy metabolism and improving mitochondrial energy utilization and lipid metabolism may be central to these therapies' potential benefits.
Prospective data on the role of these therapies in humans with PH is limited, but compelling. Brittain, et al. performed a mechanistic study to evaluate the effect of metformin in patients with Group 1 PAH [ 19 ]. In that study, 20 patients with PAH were treated with metformin which resulted in decreased RV triglyceride content and improved RV function. Despite these mechanistic improvements, the study was insufficiently powered to assess clinical outcomes. The RV, normally dependent on fatty acid oxidative metabolism, may be particularly susceptible to pathologic changes in metabolism, and may benefit from therapies which restore its balance [ 19 ,  31 ]. Enthusiasm for use of TZD therapies in PH has historically been hampered by reports of increased incident cardiac events with TZD use [ 41 ]. This concern was later relieved through additional review of study data for rosiglitazone as well as two separate pioglitazone trials showing that it reduced adverse cardiovascular events [ 42 ,  43 ,  44 ,  45 ]. Our ongoing trial ( NCT06336798 ) aims to explore the role of pioglitazone in PH further.
Our study has several limitations that merit consideration. This study relied on ICD‐9 diagnosis codes to identify PH cases as well as comorbidities which introduces the possibility of misclassification bias. More rigorous characterization of PH (e.g. through manual chart review of individuals) was not feasible given the large number of veterans in this cohort. Therefore, administrative data was utilized to best define the characteristics of the study population. Administrative data has known limitations for studying PH [ 46 ]. Recognizing this limitation, our cohort has been shown to have survival patterns which mirror those in smaller well‐defined cohort studies, specifically that PH due to heart or lung disease has worse survival from diagnosis as compared with PAH [ 2 ,  21 ,  47 ,  48 ]. While we acknowledge that bias should be reduced whenever possible, the large size of our cohort offers advantages for statistical approaches like that we describe here. Exposure to each type of antidiabetic therapy was defined using prescribing data, but medication adherence cannot be assessed. Furthermore, nondiabetic therapies may impact survival (e.g. statin use in patients with varying cardiac risk) and were not studied here. Although GFR was likely estimated from creatinine values using a race correction factor during the study period, we utilized the race‐agnostic CKD‐EPI formula to estimate GFR [ 23 ]. This may lead to misrepresentation of CKD stage, especially in Black patients. As a result, there may be small differences between data available at the time of clinical management and data used to assess renal function in this retrospective study. In addition, guidelines for antidiabetic therapy selection may have changed over the period studied, which may have influenced treatment choice in some cases. Our cohort spans the years of 2003–2015 and does not include data on persons diagnosed after this period. Creation of a new post‐2015 cohort has practical limitations including re‐developing methods of identifying PH and comorbidities across a major transition in administrative coding (the ICD‐9 to ICD‐10 transition occurring in 2015). While this may allow evaluation of the associations with outcome in persons exposed to SGLT2‐inhibitors and GLP1 agonizts, their use in VA populations has been relatively limited and so adequate statistical power to evaluate an effect while mitigating the significant background differences in the persons who receive these therapies is suspected to be limited. While it appears that the association between exposure to antidiabetic classes and outcome do not heavily depend on underlying heart or lung disease, it is possible that certain PH Groups may have more or less benefit. As it is not feasible to accurately identify the WSPH Group of individual veterans in this cohort, our findings should be taken as hypothesis generating and would support the possibility that certain metabolic pathways have beneficial impacts in PH more broadly.
In conclusion, this large retrospective study of veterans with PH and DM provides compelling evidence that antidiabetic medication selection significantly impacts survival. The consistent protective associations with metformin (20% lower mortality) and TZDs (18% lower mortality), contrasted with the adverse association with insulin (28% higher mortality), likely reflect fundamental differences in how these medications influence cellular energy metabolism including lipid handling—processes central to both pulmonary vascular remodeling and RV dysfunction which may be shared across types of PH. Taken together with existing preclinical data, our findings suggest that therapies targeting metabolism merit additional investigation as a therapeutic strategy in PH. However, effects may vary by underlying PH or metabolic phenotypes. Controlled clinical studies specifically designed to test metabolic interventions in PH are needed and should incorporate endpoints evaluating pathologic metabolic derangements. Ultimately, our findings represent a critical contribution that connects preclinical metabolic insights with real‐world evidence and suggest that medications that modify metabolic factors may play a key role in patient outcomes in PH.

Author Contributions:
All authors meet ICMJE criteria for authorship. Aaron W. Trammell, Alyssa R. Cruse and Charles Michael Hart initially developed the research concept and plan. Aaron W. Trammell, Divya Verma, Alyssa R. Cruse, and Xiangqin Cui contributed to data analysis. Aaron W. Trammell had full access to all of the data and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. All authors contributed to interpretation of data and analyzes. Aaron W. Trammell and Divya Verma developed the first draft of the article, and all authors critically revised and approved the final article.

Disclosure:
Dr. Trammell takes responsibility for the content of the manuscript, including the data and analysis.

Ethics Statement:
The study was approved by the Emory University Institutional Review Board and Atlanta VA Medical Center Research & Development Committee with a waiver of informed consent.

Conflicts of Interest:
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Data Availability Statement:
The authors have nothing to report.