[DOCUMENT METADATA]
Title: Fixed-Dose Combination Therapy as a Strategy to Improve Antidiabetic Medication Adherence in People with Type 2 Diabetes: A Narrative Review
Year: 2026
Type: review
Drugs: metformin, liraglutide, empagliflozin, dapagliflozin, saxagliptin, linagliptin, vildagliptin, glipizide, glimepiride, glyburide, pioglitazone, rosiglitazone, insulin glargine, insulin degludec
Keywords: not specified
Domain: Type 2 Diabetes Drug Interactions
[END METADATA]

[SECTION: INTRODUCTION]
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a multifactorial and burdensome metabolic condition that is characterised by insulin deficiency due to pancreatic β-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance in target tissues, resulting in impaired glucose regulation. In 2024, an estimated 589 million adults aged 20–79 years (~11% of the global population) were living with T2DM, a figure expected to rise to 853 million people by 2050 [ 1 ]. T2DM is also a major driver of cardiovascular disease (CVD), microvascular complications and premature mortality. Compared with people without T2DM, those with T2DM have a 15% higher risk of all-cause mortality [ 2 ] and a 60% higher risk of developing CVD, including relative risk increases of 54% for stroke, 73% for myocardial infarction and 84% for heart failure [ 1 ]. In 2024, approximately 3.4 million deaths in adults aged 20–79 years were attributed to T2DM, accounting for 9.3% of all deaths in this age group [ 1 ].
Despite the availability of effective pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies, glycaemic control remains suboptimal in many countries. A meta-analysis across 20 countries reported that only 42.8% of individuals with T2DM achieved recommended glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) targets, with no improvement observed over time (2006–2017) [ 3 ]. Poor glycaemic control, reflected by elevated HbA1c, is strongly associated with increased risks of diabetes-related mortality, myocardial infarction and microvascular complications such as retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy [ 4 ]. As such, ensuring optimal glycaemic control remains a key priority in the management of T2DM [ 5 ].
Adhering to prescribed treatments is vital for glycaemic control and the management of T2DM. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines adherence as ‘the extent to which a person’s behaviour – taking medication, following a diet, and/or executing lifestyle changes – corresponds with agreed recommendations from a healthcare provider’ [ 6 ].

Assessment and Prevalence of Medication Adherence:
Medication adherence is often measured objectively using either the proportion of days covered (PDC) or medication possession ratio (MPR). Both use prescription data to assess adherence on a scale of 0–100%; MPR uses the sum of dispensed medication over a given time, whilst PDC calculates the amount of medication available to the patient over a given time. Other objective methods of assessing medication adherence include pill counting, electronic monitoring devices, smart pills or biochemical adherence testing, whilst subjective methods include patient self-report questionnaires and surveys. Medication non-adherence is often defined as taking ≤80% of prescribed doses of a given medication within a given timeframe [ 7 ], and can be conceptualised into the following three categories: initiation, described as a failure or delay to begin a treatment that is newly prescribed; implementation, described as regularly missing doses of a prescribed treatment that has already been initiated; and discontinuation, described as ceasing a prescribed medication without first consulting a doctor or other healthcare professional [ 8 ].
The reported prevalence of non-adherence to antidiabetic medications for T2DM varies dependent on a number of reasons including medication type (oral versus injectable therapies), the method used to assess adherence (objective versus subjective) and the category of adherence assessed (initiation, implementation and discontinuation). Regardless, in T2DM, medication non-adherence is prevalent, with global estimates indicating that 38–44% of patients do not adhere to prescribed therapies [ 9 ,  10 ]. Medication non-adherence is multifactorial and complex, driven by a range of factors including condition-related factors (e.g. condition severity or other comorbidities), medication-related factors (e.g. overall treatment burden or complexity), socioeconomic factors (e.g. limited healthcare access or affordability), healthcare-system-related factors (e.g. medication availability) and patient-related factors (e.g. personal beliefs, demographic characteristics or health literacy) [ 6 ,  11 ,  12 ].

Clinical and Economic Consequences of Non-adherence:
The consequences of medication non-adherence in T2DM are profound, with significant clinical and economic implications. Medication non-adherence is a major contributor to poor glycaemic control, which in turn leads to both microvascular and macrovascular complications. Evidence indicates a dose–response relationship between medication non-adherence and increased HbA1c, as well as associations with adverse cardiovascular risk factors, higher rates of hospitalisation and increased mortality risk [ 13 ,  14 ]. People with T2DM who do not adhere to their medication exhibit worsened risk factors compared with adherent patients, including greater diastolic blood pressure (75.8 versus 74.2 mmHg) and LDL-cholesterol (98.2 versus 85.5 mg/dL) [ 15 ]. The risk of microvascular outcomes, such as declining renal function, renal failure or renal-related death, is more than tenfold higher in non-adherent patients compared with adherent patients taking antiplatelet therapy, while the risk of macrovascular outcomes, including myocardial infarction, stroke or CVD-related death, is nearly double for those non-adherent to blood-pressure-lowering medications [ 16 ].
Cost outcomes associated with medication non-adherence can be direct, due to medication wastage, or indirect, due to the occurrence of potentially preventable adverse outcomes. Medication non-adherence in those with T2DM translates into higher healthcare resource utilisation. For example, each 1-point increase in self-reported adherence to insulin has been associated with a 20.9% reduction in hospitalisation [ 14 ], while adherence to glucose-lowering medications is associated with reduced odds of hospitalisation or emergency department visits by 31% [ 17 ]. Non-adherence to oral glucose-lowering drugs within the first 2 years of prescription is associated with a 40% increased risk of all-cause mortality [ 18 ]. In addition, medication adherence has been associated with health-related quality of life in T2DM in numerous studies [ 19 – 22 ], although the direction of causality cannot be directly inferred.
Though data are scarce, one study that analysed US data from 2006 to 2010 showed that people with T2DM in the least adherent group (< 20% adherent) had higher annual healthcare costs compared with those in the most adherent group (> 80% adherent) (US$26,310 versus US$23,839, respectively) [ 23 ].
These clinical and economic consequences are further compounded by treatment complexity, which increases the risk of non-adherence in T2DM. Individuals with T2DM face a significant burden of multiple long-term conditions. By the age of 50 years, one in three has developed at least three chronic conditions, lives with these conditions for over two decades and has a life expectancy reduced by 11 years compared with the general population [ 24 ]. A key contributor to the effect of multiple long-term conditions on medication adherence is polypharmacy, often defined as taking five or more medications daily [ 25 ], which increases both pill or medication burden, owing to not only the number of medications required per day but also the frequency and complexity of dosing schedules [ 26 ]. Polypharmacy and elevated medication burden are common in people with T2DM [ 27 ] and may be further amplified in patients with multiple long-term conditions owing to increased treatment burden driven by complex care needs [ 28 ]. Studies investigating chronic diseases have found that a greater number of daily prescribed doses is associated with higher rates of medication non-adherence [ 29 ,  30 ]. In addition, treatment complexity, incorporating dosage form, dosing frequency and additional administration instructions, has been associated with medication non-adherence in T2DM [ 31 ].
In T2DM treatment, the efficacy of monotherapy decreases over time, resulting in ineffective glycaemic control, necessitating add-on therapy. Fixed-dose combination (FDC) therapy, which combines two or more active drugs into a single dosage, is a valuable strategy to simplify dosing regimens whilst maintaining the bioavailability of each medication [ 32 ]. For instance, in diabetes management, metformin can be combined with a number of different medications, such as sulfonylurea, sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors or dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors in either double or triple therapy, thereby reducing overall medication burden [ 32 ], and early treatment with combination therapy also leads to more long-term glycaemic control [ 5 ]. This is opposed to free-equivalent combination (FEC) therapy, in which a patient takes each medication in a separate dosage, or monotherapy, requiring only one medication to be taken.
This review therefore aims to evaluate the role of antidiabetic FDC therapy in improving adherence in T2DM, summarising its development, commonly used regimens, benefits and links to adherence, supporting evidence for effects on adherence, and implications for clinical practice and policy.

[SECTION: METHODS]
To inform this narrative review, relevant literature was identified through targeted searches of PubMed and Google Scholar. Search strategies combined terms such as ‘type 2 diabetes’, ‘fixed-dose combination’, ‘polypharmacy’ and ‘medication adherence’ in August 2025. Additional publications were identified through manual searching of reference lists from included articles and relevant reviews. Priority was given to evidence from randomised controlled trials (RCTs), observational studies and systematic reviews or meta-analyses that directly examined the relationship between FDC therapy and adherence in T2DM. Articles were selected on the basis of their relevance to the review objectives, with no restrictions on study design or year of publication, though all articles were in English.

Ethical Approval:
This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.

The Historical Development of FDCs in Diabetes:
Early non-insulin pharmacological treatment of diabetes began in the 1940s and 1950s [ 33 ]. Sulfonylureas were the first oral hypoglycaemic agents, with their glucose-lowering properties identified in the 1940s and the first commercial agent, tolbutamide, introduced in 1956. Over time, second- and third-generation sulfonylureas, such as glyburide, glipizide and glimepiride, expanded clinical use [ 33 ,  34 ]. In parallel, biguanides were developed; early synthetic biguanides were limited by toxicity, but metformin, introduced in the 1950s, proved safe and effective and has become the gold standard first-line therapy in most guidelines [ 33 ]. In subsequent decades, other drug classes designed to support glycaemic control were developed, including thiazolidinediones in the 1990s, incretin-based therapies, including DPP-4 inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) and dual agonists [ 33 ], and more recently SGLT-2 inhibitors. Each new drug class expanded the therapeutic options for achieving and sustaining glycaemic control.
Amid these developments, FDCs were introduced as an innovative approach for the treatment and management of T2DM.
First created in India in the 1970s and further developed in the 1980s, these early FDCs utilised various combinations of biguanides and sulfonylureas [ 35 ], addressing both the high burden of T2DM and the need for economical treatment options. It was not until the 1990s when a similar FDC, Glucovance (a combination of glyburide and metformin), became the first FDC formally approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Since then, the adoption of FDC therapy in the management of T2DM has grown significantly, with numerous dual oral therapies, most commonly metformin combined with sulfonylureas, DPP-4 or SGLT-2 inhibitors. A comprehensive review of approved and available antidiabetic FDCs, along with their available doses and mechanisms of action has been published by Vijayakumar et al. [ 32 ]. More recently, triple combination oral therapies have been developed, investigated and approved, for instance, metformin combined with a DPP4 inhibitor and an SGLT-2 inhibitor, which provide bioequivalence to the corresponding free-equivalent combinations (FEC) [ 36 ]. FDCs also exist for control of other cardiometabolic risk factors, for instance, combinations of lipid-lowering [ 37 ] or antihypertensive [ 38 ] medications. Different drug classes can also be combined in a ‘polypill’ to address multiple risk factor control in diabetes and cardiovascular disease [ 39 ,  40 ].
Contemporary regulatory bodies apply rigorous evaluation criteria, assessing novel FDCs on the basis of their scientific rationale, contribution of each component drug, dose proportionality and risk management plans [ 41 ,  42 ]. In order to receive approval, studies must demonstrate the safety and bioequivalence of FDC therapy with respect to their free combination equivalents. They must also prove that there is no interaction between the included drugs, and that a positive benefit-to-risk ratio of the FDC is demonstrated. This level of scrutiny ensures that any approved FDC carries minimal risk and maximal benefit for their respective clinical condition.

The Benefits of FDCs:
From the patient perspective, FDCs offer several benefits, including reducing daily pill count and burden, simplifying dosing schedules, decreasing complexity and time spent navigating access to medications, and potential cost savings [ 43 ]. In the context of T2DM, the reported advantages of FDCs include greater efficacy for glycaemic control and thus reduced risk of complications, reduced risk of adverse reactions, lower overall costs and improved medication adherence and persistence [ 44 ,  45 ] (Fig.  1 ), as well as other potential clinical benefits such as weight loss [ 46 ,  47 ]. Consequently, people with T2DM treated with FDCs have reported increased treatment satisfaction compared with those treated with monotherapy or FEC therapies [ 48 ]. FDC therapy has also been shown to be cost-effective in T2DM when compared with FEC therapy, via a reduction in healthcare resource use and decreased direct monthly healthcare costs [ 48 ]. These combined benefits provide a strong rationale for the expectation that FDCs enhance medication adherence, as they address many of the common barriers patients face in managing complex treatment regimens. While these theoretical advantages provide a strong rationale, the main question is whether FDCs translate into measurable improvements in adherence and clinical outcomes in real-world practice. This has been investigated through both RCTs, in a limited fashion, and observational research. Fig. 1 Summary of the benefits of fixed-dose combination therapy in type 2 diabetes

Effect of FDC Therapy on Medication Adherence in T2DM:
This section summarises the key literature on how FDC therapy influences medication adherence in T2DM, categorised by study design.

Randomised Controlled Trials:
Although numerous published RCTs have investigated the efficacy and safety of FDC therapy in people with T2DM, most have not reported medication adherence data as either a primary or secondary outcome, and none have directly compared FDC therapy with FEC therapy. Hwang et al. (2013) randomised people with T2DM to receive either a once-daily immediate-release or a twice-daily sustained-release FDC of glimepiride and metformin for 16 weeks. Adherence was high in both groups, with no significant difference between groups [ 49 ]. Similarly, Kim et al. (2018) conducted a 24-week RCT, and found medication adherence, as measured by a medication event monitoring system that registered when medication containers were opened, to be significantly higher in the once-daily group compared with the twice-daily group (91.7% versus 88.6%) [ 50 ]. Whilst these studies provide useful information into the effects of dose simplification on medication adherence, they did not directly compare FDC therapy with FEC. The lack of RCTs directly evaluating adherence outcomes in this context is surprising and represents a significant gap in the evidence base. Although such trials are methodologically challenging, particularly due to the Hawthorne effect (i.e. people change their medication adherence when they know it is being measured), which may inflate adherence across study arms, they remain essential. Future research should prioritise investigating the impact of FDCs on medication adherence in T2DM to provide the highest-quality evidence and inform clinical practice and regulatory decision-making.

Observational Studies:
In contrast to RCTs, numerous observational studies have investigated the impact of FDCs on medication adherence in T2DM, primarily though retrospective analysis of real-world healthcare data. Böhm et al. (2021) investigated medication adherence in people with T2DM who switched from monotherapy to either FDC or FEC therapy using a German health insurance database between 2013 and 2017. Patients that switched to FDC therapy demonstrated a significantly greater increase in adherence, as measured by PDC, compared with those who switched to FEC therapies (difference in difference regression results: year one: 0.22, year two: 0.25, year three: 0.29) [ 51 ].
Melikian et al. (2002) used a US-based pharmacy claims database from 2000 to calculate PDC in patients receiving oral glucose-lowering therapy. While no significant difference in adherence was found between newly treated patients receiving monotherapy, FEC therapy or FDC therapy, differences emerged in patients switching therapy. In patients previously requiring monotherapy, adherence rates were significantly lower when switched to FEC therapy compared with FDC therapy (54% versus 77%, respectively), and patients previously receiving FEC therapy experienced increased adherence when switched to FDC therapy (71% to 87%) [ 52 ].
Similarly, Vanderpoel et al. (2004) also utilised data from a US-based pharmacy claims database to investigate adherence in patients with uncontrolled T2DM receiving monotherapy. Patients who switched to FDC experienced a significantly lower reduction in adherence (as measured by MPR) than those switching to dual therapy (−4.6% versus −12.4%) [ 53 ].
Pan et al. (2008) utilised a US-based health insurance database (2000–2001) to compare MPR between patients receiving either FEC combinations of metformin and sulfonylureas or the equivalent FDC, matched via propensity scoring. Adherence was 13% higher in those receiving the FDC [ 54 ]. Similarly, Barner et al. (2011) analysed data from 2004 to 2007 from a US-based health insurance database and found that patients who switched from FEC of pioglitazone and metformin to equivalent FDC therapy increased MPR by 8.9% (76.0% to 82.8%), while those switching from monotherapy to FDC therapy experienced a 9% decrease (87.7% to 79.8%) [ 55 ].
Lokhandwala et al. (2015), using data from 2009 to 2013 from a similar database, found a significantly higher rate of adherence in patients receiving FDC therapy compared with those receiving FEC therapy (57.0% versus 50.7%). Interestingly, patients receiving FDC therapy also had a significantly lower rate of non-persistence (67.9% versus 73.4%), defined in this case as no 30-day gaps of medication issues in the follow-up period [ 56 ]. Cheong et al. (2008) also used a US health insurance database, comprising data from 2000 to 2004. They observed a slightly increased MPR in FDC therapy users compared with dual therapy users (78.6% versus 77.2%). They also found that whilst patients who switched from monotherapy to FDC therapy had slight decrease in adherence (from 79.7% to 78.5%), this decrease was much larger in those who switched to dual therapy instead of FDC (from 83.0% to 74.7%). In those switching from dual therapy to FDC therapy, an increase in adherence from 72.7% to 81.7% was observed [ 57 ].
Rombopoulos et al. (2015) conducted a 24-month observational study in people with T2DM inadequately controlled with metformin monotherapy. Patients were enrolled according to usual clinical practice into two groups: FDC therapy of vildagliptin and metformin, or the equivalent FEC. Self-reported adherence was higher in the FDC group compared with FEC (98.9% versus 84.6%), resulting in an odds ratio for being adherent of 18.9 (95% CI: 6.2 to 57.7,  P  < 0.001) [ 58 ]. Nishimura et al. (2018) analysed two health databases in Japan between 2010 and 2016, in which they compared PDC values between those receiving oral glucose-lowering drugs either as two-pill combinations or as FDCs. Adherence rates 12 months after initiation were generally high (≥80%) and not notably different between the two groups, though they varied depending on the exact drug combination. However, 12-month persistence rates, defined as the time from the index date to the first discontinuation of the index medication, were higher in the FDC group in both databases (70.4 versus 66.2% and 75.6 versus 55.7%) [ 45 ].
In a retrospective European database, Benford et al. (2012) examined the association of FDC therapy of glucose-lowering medications and patient adherence. They found that being categorised as ‘fairly compliant’ (rather than ‘poorly compliant’ or ‘not at all compliant’) was associated with a mean reduction in HbA1c levels of 0.42% (95% CI −0.67 to −0.18), whilst being categorised as ‘fully compliant’ as opposed to ‘fairly compliant’ was associated with a 0.17% lower HbA1c (95% −0.31 to −0.02) [ 59 ]. However, patients were allocated into these categories of compliance on the basis of physician perspective only, which is known to be unreliable when assessing patient adherence [ 60 ].
Thayer et al. (2010) conducted a retrospective analysis of data collected in 2006 from two US-based administrative claims databases to assess adherence to an FDC (a combination of rosiglitazone and glimepiride) in patients switching from monotherapy or dual therapy, comprising a thiazolidinedione and/or a sulfonylurea. Patients switching from monotherapy to FDC therapy experienced smaller reductions in MPR compared with those switching to dual therapy (−2% versus −10%), while those switching from dual to FDC therapy experienced a greater increase in adherence than those who did not switch during the observation period (10% versus 5%). Though no statistically significant difference was observed in HbA1c between those switching from monotherapy to either dual or FDC therapy (−1.08% versus −0.077%), those switching from dual to FDC therapy experienced a greater reduction than those who did not switch therapy (−0.51% versus −0.06%) [ 61 ].
Observational data also highlight the benefits of fixed ratio combination (FRC) therapies for injectable medications (so called because injections deliver a variable volume, so the ratio, rather than dose, is fixed). Edelman et al. (2022) analysed US-based electronic medical records (2017–2019) to compare medication adherence in those with T2DM receiving either iGlarLixi (an FRC of insulin glargine and the GLP-1 RA lixisenatide) or free dose combinations of basal insulin and a GLP-1RA, matched using propensity scoring. A significantly greater percentage of patients receiving FRC therapy were classed as adherent (defined as PDC ≥ 80%) than those receiving free dose combinations (41.3% versus 18.7%). Persistence, defined as no gaps of > 45 days between issues during the observation period, was also higher in the FRC group than the FEC group (44.8% versus 36.3%) [ 62 ].
To summarise, observational data consistently demonstrate that FDC therapy improves medication adherence and persistence in those with T2DM compared with FEC or dual therapies. Among patients requiring treatment beyond monotherapy, medication adherence often declines upon initiation of the additional medication as treatment complexity and/or burden increases. However, this reduction is attenuated when patients transition to FDC therapy rather than to FEC therapy. These findings highlight the potential of FDC therapies to reduce treatment burden and support better self-management in people with T2DM requiring multiple medications.

Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses:
There is a surprising lack of systematic reviews and meta-analyses specifically investigating the impact of FDCs on medication adherence in T2DM.
Hutchins et al. (2011) identified seven studies comparing FDCs with FEC therapies in those with T2DM, and found adherence was 10–13% higher in patients initiating FDC therapy than loose pill combinations (LPC). Among those switching from monotherapy to combination therapy, adherence declined less with FDCs than with LPCs (−1.5% versus −10.0%). Furthermore, switching to FDC therapy increased adherence by 3.5–12.4%, whereas remaining on LPC therapy changed adherence by −1.5% to 5.0% [ 48 ]. Similarly, Han et al. (2012) identified ten studies comparing FDCs with FEC of glucose-lowering agents and found significantly greater medication adherence (as assessed via MPR) in the FDC cohort (mean difference 8.6% [95% CI: 1.6 to 15.6%]) and in those who switched from FEC to FDC (mean difference 7.7% [95% CI: 5.7 to 9.6%]) [ 63 ].
In an extensive review of FDCs across a broad range of diseases, Wei et al. (2023) [ 64 ] identified three papers investigating FDCs versus FEC therapies in those with diabetes, and found that the adherence to treatment was 19% higher in the FDC group than in the FEC group. Similarly, Paoli et al. (2024) [ 65 ] conducted a broader review of FDC versus FEC, and identified ten studies in T2DM populations, six of which reported an improvement in medication adherence when switching from FEC to FDC.
To summarise, current systematic reviews and meta-analyses indicate that FDC therapy enhances adherence compared with FEC or dual therapy in T2DM. However, the evidence base remains limited, highlighting the need for more contemporary, comprehensive evidence synthesis to further investigate and confirm these findings. Although there is limited data from RCTs or prospectively conducted observational studies, the current body of evidence supports the impact of FDC therapy on improving medication adherence and persistence in T2DM when compared with alternative versions of combination therapies.

Potential Barriers and Limitations of FDC Therapy:
FDC therapy does present certain barriers and limitations, which are generally applicable across several conditions, not just T2DM. These can be broadly categorised into: (1) challenges related to complexity or inflexibility of FDC dosing, and (2) challenges related to management of adverse effects and drug–drug interactions.

Complexity and Inflexibility:
A major limitation of FDC therapy is its relative lack of flexibility, a fundamental issue in the provision of FDC therapy for chronic conditions. Each patient has unique treatment needs, requiring different combinations of medications and dosages depending on their specific disease status, comorbidities and management requirements. Provision of the appropriate prescription for each patient is therefore more practical and easily achieved through the prescription of individual medications at the correct dosage in an FEC format, rather than relying on inflexible FDC therapy with pre-determined dosages [ 66 ]. Similar barriers exist with FRC therapies for injectable medications in T2DM management [ 67 ]. This inflexibility can be particularly problematic during dose titration and treatment optimisation, where minor adjustments may be needed. Furthermore, if a patient experiences intolerance to a specific drug within an FDC, the entire therapy may need to be discontinued, potentially disrupting therapy [ 66 ].

Adverse Events and Drug–Drug Interactions:
It has been suggested that FDC therapy also has a potential risk of adverse events due to drug–drug interactions between individual components within the combination, which may alter the action of each other’s effects [ 68 ]. However, during the development of FDC therapies, it must be shown, using human studies, that there are no identified interactions between the included medications that affect bioequivalence or safety, beyond those already known to occur when the individual medications are administered as a free combination. As such, data from studies in those with T2DM generally shows comparable safety profiles and rates of adverse events for both FDC therapy and the equivalent FEC therapies. For instance, Wangnoo et al. (2025) investigated the safety of FDC of dapagliflozin and saxagliptin in people with T2DM already receiving metformin, and found no new or unexpected events or safety concerns compared with known safety data for the individual components [ 69 ]. Similarly, Kawamori et al. (2018) conducted an RCT to investigate the safety of an FDC of empagliflozin and linagliptin compared with a placebo (placebo + linagliptin) combination. Whilst they observed greater drug-related adverse events in the treatment group, these were consistent with known effects associated with empagliflozin, and the overall incidence of adverse events of any kind was lower in the treatment group [ 70 ]. Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis found no increased risk of adverse events associated with the use of a fixed-ratio combination of insulin degludec and liraglutide compared with either placebo, GLP1-As or insulin alone in people with T2DM [ 71 ]. Similarly, a 2017 meta-analysis of the safety, efficacy and bioavailability of FDCs in the treatment of those with T2DM found no evidence of increased adverse drug reactions when compared with dual therapy [ 32 ]. In summary, although concerns may exist regarding drug–drug interactions with FDC therapy, current evidence in T2DM does not suggest the presence of additional risk when compared with monotherapy or FEC, likely owing to the stringent developmental requirements of FDCs prior to approval.

Evidence Gaps:
Though there is substantial literature on the use of FDC therapy in T2DM and its impact on medication adherence, gaps in the existing literature remain. First, RCTs comparing FDC versus FEC therapy on medication adherence in T2DM are limited – the majority of existing studies are observational or compares non-equivalent therapy regimes. Second, long-term adherence studies are lacking. Most studies assess adherence over relatively short periods (e.g. the first 12 months after prescription), which can limit the clinical utility of the findings, as long-term adherence to medications is vital to support disease management and prevention of complications. Thirdly, there is a need for more patient-reported data on FDC therapy in T2DM, particularly regarding the impact on adherence and the facilitators or barriers experienced by patients. Lastly, recent advancements in technology, such as continuous glucose monitors, may support improved adherence to medications in T2DM by improving awareness of glucose levels and patient–physician communication and data sharing [ 72 ]. Though this would be expected to also improve adherence to FDCs in this population, there is limited data in this area and thus further investigation is warranted.

Limitations of This Review:
As this article presents a narrative review, a systematic search with strict inclusion criteria was not conducted, and therefore we acknowledge that this is not an exhaustive summary of all relevant publications in each area. Study selection bias may also have been introduced by only including studies published in English, though the aim of this narrative review was to synthesise and interpret key themes related to antidiabetic FDCs, rather than provide comprehensive global coverage of all the relevant published literature.

Clinical Implications:
Current literature supports the use of FDC therapy for improving medication adherence in T2DM. As such, FDC therapy should be considered, where available, for those with T2DM requiring multiple medications, as it can support patients to better self-manage their condition, achieve long-term glycaemic control and therefore reduce complication risk. Given the high prevalence and burden of multiple long-term conditions in those with T2DM [ 24 ], FDC therapy also offers a strategy to reduce treatment complexity and burden for patients who are often taking multiple medications for different conditions.
As with any prescription, the decision to prescribe FDC therapy should involve shared decision-making with the patient. This includes discussing the benefits and risks, explaining the role of each component in the combination, and ensuring patients understand the rationale for FDC therapy. This shared decision-making process can improve patient satisfaction with their care [ 73 ], and prevent confusion or concern when switching to a simpler with fewer daily doses.

[SECTION: CONCLUSIONS]
FDC therapy is a safe and effective strategy for maintaining or improving medication adherence in people with T2DM requiring complex treatment regimens with multiple medications. Whilst further research is needed, particularly RCTs comparing FDC with equivalent FEC therapy, current evidence supports the use of FDC therapy as a strategy to improve medication adherence in T2DM.