[DOCUMENT METADATA]
Title: Hyperaldosteronism in the Pathophysiology and Management of Cardiovascular-Kidney-Metabolic Syndrome
Year: 2026
Type: research_article
Drugs: semaglutide, empagliflozin, dapagliflozin
Keywords: aldosterone, cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic syndrome, chronic kidney disease, heart failure, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, obesity, renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS)
Domain: Type 2 Diabetes Drug Interactions
[END METADATA]

Title: Hyperaldosteronism in the Pathophysiology and Management of Cardiovascular-Kidney-Metabolic Syndrome

Authors: Evan Zeitler, Klara R. Klein, Ildiko Lingvay, Anthony Pick, Liana K. Billings, CE Ndumele, J Rangaswami, SL Chow, A Vecchiola, CF Lagos, CA Carvajal, R Baudrand, CE Fardella, M Packer, H Puzantian, R Townsend, S Bansal, AB Abdellatif, FL Fernandes-Rosa, S Boulkroun, MC Zennaro, AN Dinh Cat, M Friederich-Persson, A White, RM Touyz, PA Heidenreich, B Bozkurt, D Aguilar, T Unger, C Borghi, F Charchar, S Fruh, S Williams, K Hayes, V Perkovic, KR Tuttle, P Rossing, AM Chao, JS Tronieri, A Amaro, TA Wadden, H Otsuka, M Abe, H Kobayashi, AS Brem, R Gong, C van der Heijden, J Deinum, J LAB, MG Netea, NP Riksen, M Infante, A Armani, V Marzolla, A Fabbri, M Caprio, M Yamamuro, M Yoshimura, M Nakayama, DA Duprez, G Jia, AR Aroor, JR Sowers, A Whaley-Connell, JR Sowers, A Verma, A Vaidya, S Subudhi, SS Waikar, BJ He, ME Anderson, T Bruder-Nascimento, MA da Silva, RC Tostes, JM Brown, GL Bakris, F Jaisser, B Ke, X Tan, L Ren, F Buffolo, M Tetti, P Mulatero, S Monticone, V Xanthakis, RS Vasan, JW Gao, WB He, CM Xie, EE Kershaw, JS Flier, AJ Richard, U White, CE Elks, KR Feingold, S Anand, GM Chertow, S Beddhu, R Han, H Huang, J Zhu, JH Jeon, KY Kim, JH Kim, HK Park, RS Ahima, Z Luo, Y Zhang, F Li, D Tripathi, S Kant, S Pandey, NZ Ehtesham, HK Park, MK Kwak, HJ Kim, RS Ahima, R Satou, H Penrose, LG Navar, G Iacobellis, L Petramala, D Cotesta, N Perakakis, OM Farr, CS Mantzoros, JL Faulkner, EJ Belin de Chantemele, PE Bravo, S Morse, DM Borne, EA Aguilar, E Reisin, JE Hall, JM do Carmo, AA da Silva, Z Wang, ME Hall, AM Briones, A Nguyen Dinh Cat, GE Callera, JD Janowska, M Ren, J Pan, X Yu, K Chang, X Yuan, C Zhang, S Han, AL Jeong, S Lee, W Kawarazaki, T Fujita, L Yvan-Charvet, A Quignard-Boulange, M Packer, PK Whelton, RM Carey, WS Aronow, S Engeli, J Böhnke, K Gorzelniak, JN Cooper, L Fried, P Tepper, P Suwannasrisuk, P Boonchaya-anant, N Houngngam, S Udomsawaengsup, S Sunthornyothin, A Moiz, KB Filion, MA Tsoukas, OHY Yu, TM Peters, MJ Eisenberg, S Puglisi, A Rossini, R Poli, S Sivalingam, VS Wasehuus, V Rotbain Curovic, FH Messerli, S Bangalore, C Bavishi, SF Rimoldi, SA Hubers, NJ Brown, R Agarwal, P Kolkhof, G Bakris, M Mogi, V Perkovic, D de Zeeuw, KW Mahaffey, SD Wiviott, I Raz, MP Bonaca, C Wanner, SE Inzucchi, JM Lachin, AM Lincoff, K Brown-Frandsen, HM Colhoun, C Maric-Bilkan, KE Wellen, GS Hotamisligil, AJ Scheen, H Abuissa, PG Jones, SP Marso, JH O′Keefe, R Garg, L Kneen, GH Williams, GK Adler, S Korol, F Mottet, S Perreault, WL Baker, M White, S de Denus, JH Butt, PS Jhund, AD Henderson, RJ Garrison, WB Kannel, J Stokes, WP Castelli, LL Moore, AJ Visioni, MM Qureshi, ML Bradlee, RC Ellison, R D′Agostino, AC Huby, EJ Belin De Chantemele, M Obokata, YNV Reddy, SV Pislaru, V Melenovsky, BA Borlaug, BM Massie, PE Carson, JJ McMurray, S Yusuf, MA Pfeffer, K Swedberg, SD Solomon, J McMurray, IS Anand, B Pitt, MA Pfeffer, SF Assmann, SD Solomon, JJV McMurray, M Vaduganathan, JH Butt, AD Henderson, PS Jhund, A Olivier, B Pitt, N Girerd, SH Song, TR Oh, SH Suh, KRD Pinto, CM Feckinghaus, VN Hirakata, C Garofalo, S Borrelli, R Minutolo, P Chiodini, L de Nicola, G Conte, P Ruggenenti, M Cortinovis, M Trillini, F Mallamaci, P Ruggenenti, A Perna, NH Brandt-Jacobsen, ML Johansen, J Rasmussen, H Hu, M Cao, Y Sun, X Jin, X Zhao, X Cong, M Papasotiriou, GA Georgopoulou, A Mpratsiakou, K Ando, H Ohtsu, S Uchida, S Bianchi, R Bigazzi, VM Campese, MG Saklayen, LK Gyebi, J Tasosa, J Yap, A Chrysostomou, G Becker, E Sengul, T Sahin, E Sevin, A Yilmaz, AH van den Meiracker, RGA Baggen, S Pauli, KJ Schjoedt, K Rossing, TR Juhl, BC Yu, MS Lee, JJ Moon, EY Chung, M Ruospo, P Natale, E Morales, E Gutiérrez, J Caro, A Sevillano, J Rojas-Rivera, M Praga, RB de Paula, AA da Silva, JE Hall, GL Bakris, R Agarwal, SD Anker, B Pitt, G Filippatos, R Agarwal, R Agarwal, G Filippatos, B Pitt, P Rossing, SD Anker, G Filippatos, R Agarwal, JB Green, HJL Heerspink, HJL Heerspink, JF Cardona, S Jolly, SK Patel, H Teoh, A Saunthar, TM Yau, S Verma, S Verma, A Pandey, AK Pandey, LJ Laffin, D Rodman, JM Luther, KR Tuttle, SJ Hauske, ME Canziani, PK Judge, KR Tuttle, N Staplin

Journal: Diabetes, obesity & metabolism (2026)

Keywords: aldosterone, cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic syndrome, chronic kidney disease, heart failure, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, obesity, renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS)

Abstract:
Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome is defined by the pathologic interconnections between obesity, diabetes, chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular disease. An important and underrecognized pathophysiologic factor underlying CKM syndrome is obesity-induced aldosterone excess. This excess aldosterone causes structural and functional alterations in the kidneys, heart and vasculature promoting development of chronic kidney disease, cardiovascular disease and heart failure. Inhibition of aldosterone signalling is a pillar in the treatment approach to CKM syndrome. Pharmacologic options include renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors and steroidal (such as spironolactone) or non-steroidal (currently only finerenone) mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. Additionally, aldosterone synthase inhibitors are currently in development. Effective anti-obesity medications such as glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists inhibit aldosterone production due to their effects on adipocytes and in the kidneys. RAAS inhibition is also used to optimize the long-term management of CKM syndrome. Future research should seek to characterize the benefits of combination therapies for aldosterone excess and determine which subgroups of patients most benefit from aldosterone-targeted therapies.


1 ∣ Introduction:
Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome is a recently defined disorder representing the interconnections among obesity, diabetes, chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cardiovascular disease [ 1 ]. CKM syndrome is a progressive condition that starts (‘Stage 1’) with excess weight (body mass index [BMI] ≥ 25 kg/m 2 ) and abdominal obesity (waist circumference ≥ 88 cm women/≥ 102 cm men)  or  dysfunctional adiposity (prediabetes/impaired glucose tolerance) in the absence of other metabolic risk factors or CKD [ 1 ]. A central and underappreciated pathophysiologic factor underlying CKM syndrome is excess aldosterone activity [ 2 - 4 ], which promotes development of structural and functional alterations in the kidneys, heart and vasculature [ 4 ]. The adrenal glands are the primary source of aldosterone production [ 5 ]. However, in people with obesity, dysregulated production and secretion of adipokines by adipose tissue is a lesser-known but important contributor to this aldosterone excess [ 6 ]. Aldosterone inhibition by renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors (ARNI) and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs) have shown kidney and cardiovascular protective effects and are used to reduce the risk of disease progression and associated symptoms in hypertension, CKD and heart failure [ 7 - 10 ]. Furthermore, non-pharmacologic [ 11 ] and pharmacologic (such as glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists [GLP1-RAs] [ 12 ,  13 ]) interventions that lead to reductions in adiposity, an independent promoter of hyperaldosteronism, have also been shown to improve CKM outcomes. This manuscript reviews (1) the role of excess aldosterone in the pathophysiology of CKM syndrome (focusing on obesity-induced aldosterone excess) and (2) interventions that mitigate hyperaldosteronism with the aim of preventing adverse kidney and cardiovascular outcomes among people living with CKM syndrome.

2.1 ∣ Aldosterone in Normal Physiology:
Aldosterone, a mineralocorticoid steroid hormone, plays an essential role in the homeostatic maintenance of blood volume, electrolyte balance and systemic vascular resistance (via water and sodium reabsorption in the kidneys) [ 14 ]. Aldosterone receptors (also called mineralocorticoid receptors) are expressed throughout the body, including in the kidneys, heart and adipose tissue [ 15 - 17 ]. In the kidneys, activation of mineralocorticoid receptors on tubular epithelial cells by aldosterone stimulates sodium and water reabsorption resulting in increased blood pressure and blood volume [ 14 ]. In the heart, activation of mineralocorticoid receptors on cardiomyocytes by aldosterone stimulates normal growth (hypertrophy) [ 18 ]. Aldosterone also has indirect effects on the function of the heart and cardiovascular system due to its direct effects on the kidneys [ 19 ]. In adipocytes, aldosterone signalling via the mineralocorticoid receptor stimulates physiological differentiation and maturation of these cells [ 15 - 17 ,  20 ]. Due to the diverse roles aldosterone has across multiple systems, pathophysiologic changes in aldosterone signalling can have significant detrimental effects on physiology. Aldosterone excess is a central pathophysiologic pathway in CKM syndrome.

2.2 ∣ Aldosterone Excess Drives the Features of CKM Syndrome:
Figure 1  provides a visual summary of the pathophysiologic effects of overactivation of mineralocorticoid receptors due to aldosterone excess in CKM syndrome. Obesity and type 2 diabetes are defining features of CKM syndrome and play a role in the development of cardiovascular and/or kidney disease [ 21 ]. Such pathophysiologic links may in part be mediated by chronic aldosterone excess [ 22 - 24 ]. Obesity and type 2 diabetes are defining features of CKM syndrome and play a role in the development of cardiovascular and/or kidney disease [ 21 ]. Such pathophysiologic links may in part be mediated by chronic aldosterone excess [ 22 - 24 ]; however, distinguishing whether aldosterone is a direct driver or a marker of underlying conditions such as obesity and diabetes will be an important area of future research. Dysregulated production and secretion of adipokines by adipose tissue contribute to excess aldosterone in people living with obesity [ 6 ]. Excess aldosterone release can also exacerbate insulin resistance, fuelling the cycle of metabolic disturbance [ 4 ,  25 ]. Additionally, elevated aldosterone levels cause structural and functional alterations in the kidneys, heart and vasculature, both directly via overactivation of proinflammatory and profibrotic genes and indirectly by causing dysregulation of water, sodium and potassium balance [ 4 ,  14 ,  26 ]. Furthermore, higher serum aldosterone levels in people with CKD are independently associated with increased risk for kidney disease progression irrespective of concomitant diabetes [ 27 ]. Excess aldosterone is associated with adverse outcomes [ 27 ,  28 ]. Excess aldosterone is associated with adverse outcomes [ 28 ], including the development of hypertension, arrhythmias, fibrosis, atrial remodelling and vascular damage including vascular calcification, all of which contribute to increased risk of poor heart failure outcomes [ 29 - 31 ]. Thus, pharmacologic inhibition of excess aldosterone is an essential component of CKM syndrome treatment.

2.2 ∣ Adipose Tissue Dysfunction Leads to Excess Aldosterone:
Adipose tissue is a complex, highly metabolic endocrine organ [ 32 ]. Adipocytes are involved in energy storage and secretion of a range of substances that impact local and systemic metabolic responses [ 33 ]. The adrenal gland is the primary source of aldosterone systemically. However, in individuals living with obesity, excess adipose tissue secretes biologically active adipokines, such as resistin, complement-C1q tumour necrosis factor-related protein-1 (CTRP1), tumour necrosis factor-alpha and leptin [ 32 ,  34 - 36 ]. These adipokines can cause an increase in aldosterone levels in individuals with obesity.
Resistin and leptin are two examples of cytokines (leptin also has hormone-like effects) that promote increased production of aldosterone (although resistin may do this indirectly). Resistin, which in humans is produced by adipose-tissue macrophages [ 37 ], promotes insulin resistance by inhibiting the insulin signalling pathway in adipocytes [ 38 ] but can also cause an increase in aldosterone levels by stimulating synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines (including TNF-α) that activate RAAS ( Figure 2 ) [ 39 - 42 ]. In the normal state, leptin acts primarily on the hypothalamus regulating metabolism and energy homeostasis and is sensitive to acute changes in energy intake [ 43 ]. The concentration of leptin typically reflects the extent of energy stores or fat mass [ 43 ]. In obesity, leptin levels are increased, promoting increased aldosterone levels directly by activating leptin receptors on adrenal zona glomerulosa cells [ 44 ] and indirectly by stimulating the sympathetic nervous system [ 45 ,  46 ].
Findings from preclinical studies suggest that the adipokine CTRP1 has roles in regulating body energy homeostasis and sensitivity to insulin and also causes increases in production of CYP11B2 (aldosterone synthase) [ 36 ,  47 - 49 ] ( Figure 1 , 2 ). Levels of CTRP1 are increased in obesity, which correlates to increases in the production of aldosterone [ 36 ]. CTPR1 levels are also increased in hypertension [ 50 ]. As aldosterone dysregulation can lead to hypertension, aldosterone can indirectly cause increases in CTPR1 producing a positive feedback loop in the presence of obesity-induced hypertension that further increases aldosterone production ( Figure 2 ) [ 36 ,  51 ]. Adipocytes also produce aldosterone through an autocrine process where the cells respond to systemic angiotensin II by secreting additional angiotensin II [ 52 ]. This additional angiotensin II then binds to receptors on the adipocyte cell surface activating the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T-cell pathway [ 36 ,  47 ,  51 ]. Nuclear Factor of Activated T-cells (NFAT) upregulates transcription of genes needed for aldosterone biosynthesis, including CYP11B2 [ 47 ] (the same process as occurring in adrenal cortical cells). Results from an in vitro model of diabetes mellitus–associated obesity and vascular dysfunction, showed that adipose-derived aldosterone regulates adipocyte differentiation through an autocrine process and stimulates differentiation of vascular function via a paracrine effect [ 47 ]. The evidence on adipocyte-aldosterone production are currently limited to preclinical studies (e.g., in the above in vitro study, the authors noted a limitation of their study was that changes in plasma aldosterone were not measured, meaning the pathophysiologic significance of their findings could not be fully assessed) [ 47 ]. Nonetheless, these data support emerging hypotheses for CKM syndromes, including heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), where overproduction of proinflammatory/profibrotic adipokines can act on the heart stimulating HFpEF progression [ 53 ]. Thus, adipose tissue contributes to excess aldosterone production through a complex combination of metabolic disturbances, hormonal signals (endocrine and autocrine), inflammatory responses and activation of the RAAS.

3 ∣ Targeting Aldosterone Excess/Aldosterone Inhibition for Management of CKM Syndrome:
Targeting aldosterone excess in CKM syndrome requires a multi-mechanistic approach. Adding pharmacologic interventions that have aldosterone reducing effects ( Table 1 ) to optimal lifestyle changes can prevent or reduce the risk of dysfunction in the kidneys, heart and vasculature in individuals with obesity.  Figure 3  gives an overview of the pathophysiologic targets for these interventions and of therapies with different mechanisms of action that may be added to aldosterone inhibition. Weight loss reduces aldosterone levels via both RAAS-dependent and RAAS-independent pathways. Weight loss through various approaches, including via lifestyle intervention (diet/exercise) or by bariatric surgery, can reduce aldosterone levels [ 56 - 58 ]. For example, results from a prospective study involving 285 individuals with obesity or who were overweight found that participants who followed a lifestyle intervention programme consisting of eating a healthy diet and physical activity had reductions in serum aldosterone levels in addition to reductions in leptin and insulin resistance [ 57 ]. In another study, weight loss after bariatric surgery ( n  = 14) was associated with aldosterone level reduction, especially during the first 3 months post-surgery, a change that correlated with the amount of weight loss [ 58 ].
GLP1-RA drugs may be combined with other therapies for the long-term management of CKM syndrome. These agents cause weight loss through multiple mechanisms, including appetite suppression and slowed digestion [ 59 ]. Weight loss via GLP1-RAs likely indirectly leads to reduction in aldosterone levels as the adipose tissue is a site of aldosterone production. GLP1-RAs have been shown to reduce aldosterone levels independently of their weight loss effects, possibly due to inhibition of angiotensin II activity in the kidneys [ 60 ]. A prospective trial involving 60 individuals with type 2 diabetes, albuminuria and a BMI ~30 kg/m 2  treated with empagliflozin (a sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 [SGLT2] inhibitor), randomized participants to the GLP1-RA semaglutide or placebo. It found that semaglutide led to a greater reduction in aldosterone levels compared to placebo; albeit in this study there were no significant changes observed in urinary albumin-creatinine ratio, measured glomerular filtration rates (GFR), 24-h systolic blood pressure, body weight or plasma renin levels [ 61 ]. Results from the FLOW trial, in which 3533 participants with type 2 diabetes and CKD were randomized to semaglutide or placebo, showed a significantly reduced risk of clinically important kidney outcomes and death from cardiovascular causes with semaglutide versus placebo; however, the study provided no direct evidence to establish aldosterone as a mediator of these effects [ 12 ]. These results suggest that although GLP1-RAs can reduce aldosterone levels, it is unclear whether this lowering effect contributes meaningfully to their cardiorenal protective effects, or if the effects of these agents observed in large randomized controlled trials are an epiphenomenon of their pleiotropic actions on different pathways, including on aldosterone. Given the limitations of these studies, further research to verify the role of GLP-1 RAs in aldosterone lowering is warranted.
Therapies that inhibit aldosterone independent of weight loss include RAAS inhibitors, ARNI and MRAs. RAAS inhibitors affect aldosterone levels by directly inhibiting one or more components of the RAAS that would otherwise lead to aldosterone production and release. Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) (a type of RAAS inhibitor) selectively inhibit the binding of angiotensin II to the angiotensin type-1 receptor, resulting in vasodilation, reduced aldosterone secretion and reduced blood pressure [ 62 ]. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEis) (also a type of RAAS inhibitor) competitively inhibit ACE, which blocks conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II, with effects including reduction of blood pressure [ 62 ]. The sacubitril component of ARNI (sacubitril-valsartan) inhibits neprilysin, which means that natriuretic peptides (which act antagonistically to RAAS activation) are not broken down by neprilysin, thus optimizing the RAAS inhibitory effect of the ARB (valsartan) part of the combination [ 63 ]. Here, although sacubitril does not inhibit RAAS directly, it helps to reduce aldosterone levels by maintaining physiological opposition to RAAS overactivation.
MRAs (steroidal and non-steroidal) directly inhibit aldosterone from binding to the mineralocorticoid receptor and so inhibit further pathophysiologic damage by inhibiting synthesis of proinflammatory and profibrotic mediators and cytokines [ 64 ]. An MRA may be added to a RAAS inhibitor if the use of a RAAS inhibitor alone does not sufficiently improve clinical parameters and symptoms; thus, relying on drugs with different mechanisms of action to ‘mop-up’ the aldosterone breakthrough that can occur with RAAS inhibitors [ 65 ].
SGLT2 inhibitors have shown both kidney- and cardiovascular-protective benefits. Initially developed to treat hyperglycaemia in patients with type 2 diabetes, results from trials with kidney outcomes have shown that SGLT2 inhibitors consistently show robust benefits in slowing CKD progression, reducing albuminuria and lowering the risk of kidney failure in both diabetic and non-diabetic CKD populations [ 66 - 68 ]. SGLT2 inhibitors do not affect aldosterone levels based on current evidence; however, they can modulate other components of the RAAS including plasma renin activity, particularly during the early phase of treatment [ 60 ].

4 ∣ Reducing Aldosterone Excess in People Living With Obesity to Improve Outcomes in CKD, Heart Failure, Type 2 Diabetes and Hypertension:
As discussed above, weight loss can be effective in reducing aldosterone excess [ 56 - 58 ]. Large-scale randomized controlled trials involving semaglutide have also demonstrated the beneficial cardiovascular and kidney effects of pharmacologic weight loss [ 12 ,  69 ] but how much of this is mediated by improvements in aldosterone signalling via semaglutide action is not known. Aldosterone inhibition in obesity is thus an attractive but under-explored target for reducing adverse outcomes in people living with obesity.

4.1 ∣ Aldosterone Inhibition in People Living With Obesity and Type 2 Diabetes or Hypertension:
Along with obesity, type 2 diabetes and hypertension are risk factors for the development and progression of CKD and cardiovascular disease [ 70 ]. Improvements in insulin sensitivity by reducing markers of inflammation in diabetes and obesity [ 71 ] may involve inhibition of aldosterone. Results from two meta-analyses suggest that an ACEi or an ARB may prevent the development of type 2 diabetes [ 72 ,  73 ]. Spironolactone, a steroidal MRA, has a limited role in diabetes prevention; results from a randomized controlled trial demonstrated that spironolactone had no effect on insulin sensitivity in normotensive individuals ( n  = 38) with obesity [ 74 ]. Furthermore, results from a systematic review and meta-analysis showed inconsistency in the effects of spironolactone on glucose homeostasis. In this analysis it was suggested that spironolactone may increase A1C, whereas eplerenone, a more mineralocorticoid receptor-specific steroidal MRA, had no effect [ 75 ] However, this analysis did not take weight into account. Results from a prespecified sub-analysis from a phase 3 trial (FINEARTS-heart failure [HF]) found that finerenone (a non-steroidal MRA) reduced the hazard for new-onset diabetes to a greater extent versus placebo in patients with heart failure with preserved or mildly reduced ejection fraction (heart failure [HF]mrEF; HFpEF) at baseline [ 76 ]. These results suggest a possible role for aldosterone inhibitors in diabetes prevention/control, but more data are needed. Additionally, the benefit of non-steroidal MRAs over steroidal MRAs in the context above is speculative and exploratory. Studies are needed to investigate this as a primary outcome (that also incorporates assessing the variability in glycaemic effects) in clinical trials.
Obesity-induced hypertension is the most common form of hypertension. Results from a Framingham Study analysis suggest that the majority of the risk of hypertension can be directly related to excess body weight [ 77 ]. Weight reduction is associated with reduction in blood pressure; for example, results from a separate analysis from the Framingham Study showed that weight loss of ≥ 6.8 kg decreased the long-term hypertension risk by 21%–29% [ 78 ]. Furthermore, in another study, bariatric surgery was found to be associated with reduction in systolic blood pressure at 3 months ( p  = 0.001) and diastolic blood pressure at 6 months ( p  = 0.008) post-bariatric surgery [ 58 ]. Although it is not clear if aldosterone inhibitors prevent hypertension in obesity, they are of critical importance in treating people with obesity and hypertension as aldosterone is a primary driver of hypertension in these individuals. There is also a suggestion that individuals with obesity and hypertension may be more responsive to MRAs (vs. RAAS inhibitor alone) [ 79 ], supporting the role of direct aldosterone inhibition as part of the hypertension treatment algorithm in such individuals. However, further work is needed to test this hypothesis.

4.2 ∣ Aldosterone Inhibition in Individuals With Obesity and Heart Failure:
Obesity-related HFpEF is a distinct clinical and physiologic phenotype that requires specific treatments [ 80 ]. Results from a retrospective analysis of patient data collected at the Mayo Clinic Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory ( n  = 266) suggest that individuals with obesity-related HFpEF have greater biventricular remodelling, volume overload, right ventricular dysfunction, ventricular interaction (degree of coupling between left and right ventricles in the pericardial space) and pericardial restraint, worse exercise capacity, more profound hemodynamic derangements and impaired pulmonary vasodilation compared to those with non-obesity related HFpEF [ 80 ].
Aldosterone inhibition is effective in reducing mortality in people with HF with a reduced ejection fraction (heart failure [HF] rEF) but evidence in patients with HFpEF is less robust. The I-PRESERVE trial investigated the efficacy and safety of the ARB irbesartan in patients with HFpEF (LVEF ≥ 45%); there was no significant difference between irbesartan and placebo in the primary endpoint of death from any cause or hospitalization for cardiovascular causes [ 81 ]. In the CHARM-preserved trial, the ARB candesartan had only a moderate impact in preventing hospital admissions for heart failure in patients with HFpEF (LVEF > 40%) versus placebo, with no difference between the groups in rates of cardiovascular death [ 82 ]. It is important to note that neither the I-PRESERVE nor CHARM-preserved trials accounted for participants′ baseline BMI or waist circumference although the mean baseline BMI in both trials was around 29 kg/m 2 , suggesting many patients were overweight or had obesity. The PARAGON-heart failure [HF] trial (ARNI vs. ARB in patients with HFpEF) excluded patients with severe obesity (required BMI of < 40 kg/m 2 ) suggesting a less diverse population in terms of baseline weight versus the ARB trials noted above [ 83 ]. In PARAGON-HF, there was no difference in the primary outcome measure of total hospitalizations for heart failure and death from cardiovascular causes [ 83 ].
The TOPCAT trial compared the efficacy and safety of spironolactone in patients with HFpEF to placebo; this trial did not exclude patients based on their baseline weight or BMI [ 84 ]. Although the TOPCAT trial did not show a significant difference between treatments, a post hoc analysis (causal forest algorithm) that looked at the heterogeneous effects of spironolactone did show that spironolactone treatment in patients with HFpEF who have high BMI (> 31.71 kg/m 2 ) (and high white blood cell count) reduced the risk of cardiovascular death [ 85 ].
More recently, the effect of finerenone in patients with HFpEF or heart failure [HF]mrEF (LVEF ≥ 40%) was investigated in the FINEARTS-HF trial. In this trial, finerenone significantly lowered the rate of a composite of total worsening heart failure events and death from cardiovascular causes versus placebo (primary composite) [ 86 ]. Similar to the TOPCAT trial, the FINEARTS-HF trial did not exclude patients based on their baseline weight or BMI. Results from a prespecified analysis of FINEARTS-HF showed that the beneficial effects of finerenone on clinical events and symptoms were consistent, irrespective of BMI at baseline ( n  = 395/6001 patients reviewed had a BMI ≥ 40 kg/m 2 ) but with a more pronounced effect on the primary outcome in patients with higher BMI [ 87 ]. These findings are consistent with data from patients with HFrEF, in whom the effect of eplerenone has been noted to be more pronounced in those with obesity [ 88 ].
There are important differences between ARBs and MRAs. While some sources suggest ectopic aldosterone production is suppressible by ARB treatment, antagonism at the mineralocorticoid receptor itself hypothetically blocks signalling from all sources of aldosterone more effectively and may explain the improved outcomes among patients with obesity in the trials discussed above. MRAs appear to demonstrate a greater overall benefit when obesity is present. These findings suggest a potential beneficial effect of aldosterone inhibition, especially via antagonism of the mineralocorticoid receptor, in patients with obesity-related heart failure.

4.3 ∣ Aldosterone Inhibition in Individuals Living With Obesity and CKD:
Obesity is an independent risk factor for CKD (obesity-related kidney disease) irrespective of whether diabetes or hypertension are present [ 89 ,  90 ]. A 2017 systematic review and metaanalysis explored the role of BMI in predicting new-onset CKD in a general adult population (> 600 000 individuals) [ 91 ]; the risk of new-onset low estimated GFR (eGFR) and albuminuria increased by 28% and 51%, respectively, for people living with obesity compared with individuals without obesity [ 91 ]. These results persisted regardless of whether metabolic syndrome was present. Additionally, obesity is associated with glomerular hyperfiltration and contributes to chronic deterioration in glomerular filtration rates in persons with type 2 diabetes with no overt kidney disease [ 92 ].
Aldosterone inhibitors may have a kidney protective role in individuals with obesity and who are at risk of CKD or already have CKD. A posthoc analysis of the REIN trial showed that obesity predicts a higher incidence of adverse kidney events, but this risk was removed in patients who received the ACEi ramipril versus those who received placebo [ 93 ]. Furthermore, this risk reduction was more pronounced in people living with obesity compared to people without obesity.
The effect of adding spironolactone or eplerenone to a standard treatment/s (such as a RAAS inhibitor) on kidney outcomes has been evaluated in several trials [ 94 - 104 ]. Both spironolactone and eplerenone reduce proteinuria to a greater extent than a RAAS inhibitor alone but with mixed results regarding their effect on eGFR, and the combination causes higher rates of raised potassium and hyperkalaemia [ 96 - 105 ]. Importantly, in one trial, baseline aldosterone levels were significantly correlated with baseline proteinuria levels ( r  = 0.766,  p  < 0.0001 vs. baseline value) as well as with the percent reduction in proteinuria following treatment with spironolactone [ 98 ].
Obesity or overweight may not impact spironolactone′s antiproteinuric effect. Results from a prospective cohort study showed that the observed antiproteinuric effects of spironolactone (plus standard therapy that may include a RAAS inhibitor) were not changed in the presence or absence of obesity [ 106 ]. Eplerenone may also have kidney protective effects (such as reduction in glomerular hyperfiltration) that are independent of weight but published data are currently limited to animal studies [ 107 ]. Additionally, the non-steroidal MRA finerenone has demonstrated efficacy in patients with CKD associated with type 2 diabetes. Results from the phase 3 trials, FIDELIO-DKD and FIGARO-DKD, showed a lower risk of CKD progression and cardiovascular events with finerenone (added to the maximum tolerated dose of a RAAS inhibitor) versus placebo [ 107 - 109 ]. The FIDELITY analysis combined data from these two trials, with the main conclusions of this analysis being that finerenone (vs. placebo) reduced the risk of clinically important cardiovascular and kidney outcomes across the spectrum of patients with CKD and type 2 diabetes [ 110 ]. A post hoc analysis of the FIDELITY analysis found that the benefits of lowering the risk of cardiovascular and kidney adverse outcomes reported in FIDELITY were not significantly modified by obesity but that finerenone′s effect was most pronounced among those with obesity (referred to in the analysis as being high-very high [cardiovascular] risk based on waist circumference measurements) [ 111 ]. In the CONFIDENCE trial, patients with both CKD and type 2 diabetes who received finerenone in combination with empagliflozin had a greater reduction in the urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio and systolic blood pressure than with either treatment alone [ 112 ]. The ongoing FIND-CKD study ( NCT05047263 ), which is investigating the potential kidney protective effects of finerenone in patients with non-diabetic CKD, does not include baseline weight exclusions and is therefore likely to include patients with obesity in whom future sub-analyses may be instructive. Another non-steroidal MRA, balcinrenone, is being tested (in combination with a SGLT2i) for potential use in HF in individuals with impaired kidney function (BalanceD-H [ NCT06307652 ]). In the recently completed phase 2b MIRO-CKD study, balcinrenone in combination with dapagliflozin was more efficacious versus dapagliflozin monotherapy in reducing albuminuria in patients with CKD; this trial did not exclude participants based on baseline weight [ 113 ].
Based on the trials and analyses above, aldosterone inhibitors appear to have kidney protective effects in individuals with obesity and kidney dysfunction. RAAS inhibitors are well established to have kidney protective effects. Adding a steroidal MRA to a RAAS inhibitor may improve proteinuria/albuminuria further. Individuals with obesity taking a steroidal MRA or the non-steroidal MRA finerenone could have as much kidney-related benefit from treatment as those without obesity, and in some cases, the effects may be more profound for those with obesity. However, specifically in relation to steroidal MRAs, in the absence of long-term phase 3 outcome studies, it is unclear what impact these drugs will have on major kidney outcomes such as end-stage kidney disease. It should also be noted that no trials have thus far examined the kidney protective effects of MRAs in the presence of obesity alone and without diabetes.
A new class of aldosterone inhibitors is currently in development, called aldosterone synthase inhibitors (baxdrostat, lorundrostat and vicadrostat), which prevent catalysis of the final steps of aldosterone biosynthesis from steroid precursors in the zona glomerulosa [ 114 ,  115 ]. A recent (2025) comprehensive narrative review compared the features and future potential benefits of aldosterone synthase inhibitors with MRAs; the authors suggested that the added benefits of aldosterone synthase inhibitors include aldosterone suppression via both non-genomic and genomic mechanisms and a reduced risk of hyperkalaemia and aldosterone ‘escape’ versus MRAs. Aldosterone synthase inhibitors are in late-stage (phase 3) clinical development for potential use in hypertension (lorundrostat and baxdrostat) and for CKD or HF (prevention/treatment) (baxdrostat and vicadrostat) in combination with a SGLT2i. For example, recent results from trials testing lorundrostat (people with uncontrolled hypertension) or vicadrostat (people with CKD) provide support for the efficacy and safety of these drugs in individuals with or without obesity. In the case of lorundrostat, results from the Target-HTN trial showed a significantly greater effect of lorundrostat versus placebo on lowering blood pressure in patients with obesity (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 ) versus those without obesity [ 116 ]. Results from a phase 2 trial with vicadrostat showed clinically meaningful, dose-dependent reductions in the albumin-to-creatinine ratio with vicadrostat, with or without the SGLT2i empagliflozin (people with CKD and baseline BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 ); there were also no unexpected safety signals [ 117 ]. The ongoing large-scale (~11 000 participants) phase 3 EASi-KIDNEY trial aims to expand on these findings and will further study the safety and efficacy of vicadrostat in combination -with empagliflozin in a broad range of patients with CKD with and without diabetes [ 118 ].

5 ∣ Conclusions:
Excess aldosterone is a central and underrecognized pathophysiologic factor in cardiovascular–kidney–metabolic (CKM) syndrome. Adipose tissue dysfunction contributes to aldosterone overproduction through inflammatory, hormonal and RAAS-mediated pathways, exacerbating insulin resistance and increasing the risk of developing/worsening of conditions such as hypertension, heart failure and chronic kidney disease. Pharmacologic inhibition of aldosterone via RAAS inhibitors, non-steroidal or steroidal MRAs and the newer aldosterone synthase inhibitors offers a targeted approach to mitigate these risks. Additionally, weight loss through lifestyle interventions, GLP1 RAs, or bariatric surgery can reduce aldosterone levels and improve CKM syndrome outcomes through both RAAS-dependent and independent mechanisms. Evidence suggests that individuals with obesity may derive as great a benefit from aldosterone inhibition as those without obesity, particularly in the context of heart failure and CKD. However, data are currently conflicting—future research should focus on optimizing combination therapies and identifying patient subgroups most likely to benefit from early and sustained aldosterone-targeted interventions.

Funding:
The authors have nothing to report.

Data Availability Statement:
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
