[DOCUMENT METADATA]
Title: Mechanisms and Therapeutic Potential of Sodium–Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors in Heart Failure
Year: 2026
Type: research_article
Drugs: empagliflozin, dapagliflozin, canagliflozin, ertugliflozin
Keywords: sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, heart failure, mechanisms of action, clinical therapy
Domain: Type 2 Diabetes Drug Interactions
[END METADATA]

Title: Mechanisms and Therapeutic Potential of Sodium–Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors in Heart Failure

Authors: Zuyuan Huang, Guoxing Ling, Chen Fang, Zimin Wu, Shigao Ye, Chuanliang Zhang, Cheng Luo, Baoshi Zheng, Massimo Iacoviello, MS Khan, I Shahid, A Bennis, A Rakisheva, M Metra, J Butler, M Wang, Z Liu, S Ren, J Zhu, N Morisawa, GL Chua, ZI Hegedűs, ME Jakab, TG Gergely, NV Sayour, A Kovács, S Antal, JJV McMurray, M Packer, AS Desai, J Gong, MP Lefkowitz, AR Rizkala, X Wang, O Vardeny, B Claggett, M Vaduganathan, SM Hegde, H Skali, H Gao, Q Wei, A Zou, K Yu, D Song, J Li, F Zannad, JP Ferreira, SJ Pocock, SD Anker, J Butler, G Filippatos, M Böhm, J Butler, A Coats, L Lauder, F Mahfoud, G Filippatos, F Cinti, R Laborante, L Cappannoli, C Morciano, S Gugliandolo, A Pontecorvi, M Packer, SD Anker, J Butler, G Filippatos, SJ Pocock, P Carson, AM Billing, YC Kim, S Gullaksen, B Schrage, J Raabe, A Hutzfeldt, ZC Dai, JX Chen, R Zou, XB Liang, JX Tang, CW Yao, P Grubić Rotkvić, M Cigrovski Berković, N Bulj, L Rotkvić, I Ćelap, V Perkovic, MJ Jardine, B Neal, S Bompoint, HJL Heerspink, DM Charytan, Z Jiang, DX Chen, C Xiao, Y Fu, J Zhang, A Ovchinnikov, A Potekhina, A Filatova, O Svirida, K Zherebchikova, F Ageev, JP Ferreira, SD Anker, J Butler, G Filippatos, JL Januzzi, E Schueler, DL Bhatt, M Szarek, PG Steg, CP Cannon, LA Leiter, DK McGuire, C Adamson, T Kondo, PS Jhund, RA de Boer, JW Cabrera Honorio, B Claggett, R Myte, A Mattsson, M Poole, DJ Little, P Nyström, A Henderson, A Tanaka, S Toyoda, T Imai, K Shiina, H Tomiyama, Y Matsuzawa, JM Beernink, N Jongs, CM Mosterd, RA Scholtes, A Caldwell-McGee, D Casillas, ME Nassif, SL Windsor, F Tang, Y Khariton, M Husain, SE Inzucchi, WL Baker, LR Smyth, DM Riche, EM Bourret, KW Chamberlin, WB White, M Wang, B Preckel, CJ Zuurbier, NC Weber, KA Connelly, Y Zhang, A Visram, A Advani, SN Batchu, JF Desjardins, MMY Lee, KJM Brooksbank, K Wetherall, K Mangion, G Roditi, RT Campbell, SD Solomon, JJV McMurray, B Claggett, RA de Boer, D DeMets, AF Hernandez, S Chen, Q Wang, D Bakker, X Hu, L Zhang, I van der Made, J Guerrero-Mauvecin, N Villar-Gómez, L Miño-Izquierdo, A Povo-Retana, AM Ramos, G Ruiz-Hurtado, GA Laine, SJ Allen, VS Rao, JB Ivey-Miranda, ZL Cox, J Moreno-Villagomez, C Maulion, L Bellumkonda, KM Hallow, G Helmlinger, PJ Greasley, JJV McMurray, DW Boulton, H Yu, S Basu, KM Hallow, NA Mordi, IR Mordi, JS Singh, RJ McCrimmon, AD Struthers, CC Lang, I Mendez Espinoza, END Choos, CM Ecelbarger, BD Shepard, SR Yurista, HHW Silljé, SU Oberdorf-Maass, EM Schouten, MG Pavez Giani, JL Hillebrands, K Berg-Hansen, M Bangshaab, N Gopalasingam, R Nielsen, M Svart, N Rittig, Z Wicik, A Nowak, J Jarosz-Popek, M Wolska, C Eyileten, JM Siller-Matula, K Færch, D Vistisen, G Pacini, SS Torekov, NB Johansen, DR Witte, L Goedeke, Y Ma, RC Gaspar, A Nasiri, J Lee, D Zhang, H Honka, C Solis-Herrera, C Triplitt, L Norton, J Butler, RA DeFronzo, AK Pandey, NK Dhingra, M Hibino, V Gupta, S Verma, Y Song, C Huang, J Sin, JDF Germano, DJR Taylor, R Thakur, O Iborra-Egea, E Santiago-Vacas, SR Yurista, J Lupón, M Packer, S Heymans, M Packer, VM Monda, C Voci, F Strollo, A Passaro, S Greco, M Monesi, TT Yoo, IH Baek, L Stoletniy, A Hilliard, A Sakr, D Doycheva, N Harouki, L Nicol, I Remy-Jouet, JP Henry, A Dumesnil, A Lejeune, SR Kim, SG Lee, SH Kim, JH Kim, E Choi, W Cho, BB Zhao, J Wang, LL Zhang, C Li, HH Xue, L Zhao, Z Zhang, J Tang, J Song, M Xie, Y Liu, Z Dong, EM Elbaz, A Darwish, AM Gad, AAS Abdel Rahman, MH Safwat, XF Lin, XN Cui, J Yang, YF Jiang, TJ Wei, L Xia, Y Cao, X Mo, T Wang, Q Tian, S Zhang, Y Zhu, M Guo, Z Xia, Y Hong, H Ji, F Li, W Liu, RF Abdel-Rahman, MH Alsugoor, N ALSuhaymi, HM Fayed, SS Mahmoud, FA Ibrahim, M Lu, X Qin, J Yao, Y Yang, M Zhao, L Sun, S Kostin, F Krizanic, T Kelesidis, N Pagonas, K Yang, R Gao, H Chen, J Hu, P Zhang, X Wei, Z Wang, S Liu, J Shi, D Chen, S Li, S Yu, L Zhang, H Zhang, X Xie, R Tie, X Shang, Q Zhao, A Mroueh, P Algara-Suarez, W Fakih, DS Gong, K Matsushita, SH Park, SR Yurista, HHW Silljé, H van Goor, JL Hillebrands, HJL Heerspink, L de Menezes Montenegro, PK Vlachakis, P Theofilis, D Tousoulis, AJ Sauer, J Chang, Z Fu, C Valenzuela Ripoll, Y Cho, Z Guo, H Lu, P Shang, D Zhou, LP Cohen, N Isaza, I Hernandez, GD Lewis, JE Ho, GC Fonarow, M Raya-Cruz, JG Jurado, GO de la Torre Peregrín, N Montúfar, AR Sánchez, FG Delgado, D von Lewinski, E Kolesnik, F Aziz, M Benedikt, NJ Tripolt, M Wallner, YF Zhang, YX Liu, WX Yang, ME Nassif, SL Windsor, K Gosch, BA Borlaug, M Husain, SE Inzucchi, JL Januzzi, J Xu, J Li, W Shaw, R Oh, M Pfeifer, AN Makam, L Bailey, N Anderson, K Bellitti, S Skinner, OK Nguyen, WC Stanley, FA Recchia, GD Lopaschuk, B Feng, P Yu, H Yu, B Qian, Y Li, K Sun, S Selvaraj, LC Kwee, EJ Thompson, M He, CP Hornik, AD Devore, K Huang, X Luo, B Liao, G Li, J Feng, N Gangat, A Tefferi, NE Ibrahim, JL Januzzi, E Daud, O Ertracht, N Bandel, G Moady, M Shehadeh, T Reuveni, M Dai, Z Jia, H Wang, P Zheng, Y Xue, K Gong, Ν Nasiri-Ansari, GK Dimitriadis, G Agrogiannis, D Perrea, ID Kostakis, G Kaltsas, I Leo, N Salerno, S Figliozzi, A Cersosimo, J Ielapi, K Stankowski, A D’Amato, S Prosperi, P Severino, V Myftari, A Labbro Francia, C Cestiè, JE Doiron, H Xia, X Yu, AR Nevins, KB LaPenna, TE Sharp, JJV McMurray, SD Solomon, SE Inzucchi, L Køber, MN Kosiborod, FA Martinez, M Pourafkari, KA Connelly, S Verma, CD Mazer, H Teoh, A Quan, SD Anker, J Butler, G Filippatos, JP Ferreira, E Bocchi, M Böhm, MCH Lassen, JW Ostrominski, SE Inzucchi, BL Claggett, I Kulac, P Jhund, MN Kosiborod, PS Jhund, KF Docherty, M Diez, MC Petrie, S Verma, H Alnsasra, G Tsaban, A Solomon, F Khalil, E Aboalhasan, JM Weinstein, A Engström, J Söderling, A Hviid, B Eliasson, S Gudbjörnsdottir, V Wintzell, T Kanie, A Mizuno, Y Takaoka, T Suzuki, D Yoneoka, Y Nishikawa, K Steiger, KS Swarna, J Herrin, RG McCoy, AA Dixit, BT Bateman, MT Hawn, MC Odden, EC Sun, AA Voors, CE Angermann, JR Teerlink, SP Collins, M Kosiborod, J Biegus, C Danielson, G Lileikyte, W Ouwerkerk, C S P Lam, D Erlinge, THK Teng, J Tromp, W Ouwerkerk, DJ van Veldhuisen, HL Hillege, AM Richards, P van der Meer, ZL Cox, SP Collins, GA Hernandez, AT McRae, BT Davidson, K Adams, M Kosiborod, MA Cavender, AZ Fu, JP Wilding, K Khunti, RW Holl, KF Docherty, K McDowell, P Welsh, MC Petrie, I Anand, DD Berg, N Sattar, J Butler, MMY Lee, J Harrington, A Sharma, F Zannad, JA Linck, C Michels, A Schwanstecher, I Schamarek, D Hinsch, C Terkamp, T Min, E Crockett, A Pavlou, SC Bain, J Chen, C Jiang, M Guo, Y Zeng, Z Jiang, D Zhang, JP Ferreira, F Vasques-Nóvoa, F Saraiva, AC Oliveira, J Almeida, AB Batista, MJ Vargas-Brochero, I Russo, T Mazzierli, A Cara, GM Berti, J Milheiro, JP Ferreira, P Marques, SD Anker, J Butler, G Filippatos, A Sharma, HH Wang, YW Chiu, CY Chung, YM Liao, YH Lee, HM Kuo

Journal: Reviews in Cardiovascular Medicine (2026)

Keywords: sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, heart failure, mechanisms of action, clinical therapy

Abstract:
Heart failure (HF) is a major global cause of hospitalization and mortality, representing a complex clinical syndrome with significant unmet therapeutic needs. Sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2is), originally developed for glycemic control, have recently demonstrated remarkable efficacy in the management of HF. This review comprehensively examines the mechanisms of action and therapeutic potential of SGLT2is in HF, with a focus on their multifaceted effects on hemodynamics, cardiac metabolism, inflammatory responses, oxidative stress, and neuroendocrine activation. In addition, clinical trial outcomes and safety profiles of SGLT2is in HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), and HF with mid-range ejection fraction (HFmrEF) are thoroughly evaluated. Finally, this article discusses future research directions and clinical application prospects, aiming to provide novel insights and strategies for treating HF.


1. Introduction:
Heart failure (HF) represents the terminal stage of various cardiovascular 
diseases, affecting over 64 million individuals worldwide, with its prevalence 
continuing to rise due to aging populations and the increasing incidence of 
metabolic disorders [ 1 ]. Despite advances in pharmacologic and device-based 
therapies—such as renin–angiotensin system inhibitors,  β -blockers, and 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs)—HF remains associated with high 
hospitalization and mortality rates, underscoring the need for novel and more 
effective treatments [ 2 ,  3 ,  4 ]. However, their limitations, including suboptimal 
efficacy and potential adverse effects with long-term use, underscore the need 
for novel therapeutic approaches [ 5 ].
Sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2is), initially developed as 
antidiabetic agents that block renal glucose reabsorption, have emerged as a 
major therapeutic breakthrough in HF management [ 6 ]. Beyond their 
glucose-lowering effect, large-scale clinical trials and meta-analyses have 
demonstrated that SGLT2is significantly reduce cardiovascular death and HF 
hospitalizations and provide renal protection across diverse patient populations, 
including those without diabetes [ 6 ,  7 ,  8 ].
Despite the promising therapeutic potential of SGLT2is in HF, the complexity and 
heterogeneity of their mechanisms of action warrant further investigation [ 9 ]. 
This review aims to comprehensively explore the mechanisms and therapeutic 
potential of SGLT2is in HF, with an in-depth analysis of their multifaceted 
effects on hemodynamics, cardiac metabolism, inflammatory responses, oxidative 
stress, and neuroendocrine activation. Furthermore, we systematically evaluate 
clinical trial outcomes of SGLT2is in HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), 
HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), and HF with mid-range ejection 
fraction (HFmrEF), along with a detailed discussion of their safety profile in 
clinical practice [ 10 ]. By elucidating the multi-target effects of SGLT2is, this 
review seeks to provide more precise and effective therapeutic strategies for HF 
patients, ultimately improving their prognosis and alleviating the global 
healthcare burden.

2. Overview of SGLT2is:
SGLT2is represent a novel class of oral antihyperglycemic agents that have 
received significant attention in the medical field due to their unique mechanism 
of action and broad clinical applications [ 11 ]. SGLT2is primarily function by 
inhibiting the activity of SGLT2 in the proximal renal tubules, thereby reducing 
glucose reabsorption and promoting urinary glucose excretion, which effectively 
lowers blood glucose levels [ 6 ] (Fig.  1 ). Beyond glycemic control, SGLT2is exert 
beneficial hemodynamic effects by increasing urinary sodium excretion and 
inducing osmotic diuresis, which alleviates cardiac preload, reduces blood 
pressure, and preserves cardiac function [ 12 ]. In addition, SGLT2is inhibit 
sodium–glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) in cardiomyocytes, mitigating 
intracellular sodium overload, calcium overload, and oxidative stress, thereby 
improving ventricular remodeling and protecting myocardial tissue [ 13 ]. SGLT2is 
also modulate adipose tissue metabolism and inflammation, attenuate myocardial 
fibrosis, and enhance cardiac metabolic remodeling [ 13 ].
SGLT2is have a wide range of clinical applications, including use in adult 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) who have inadequate glycemic 
control with oral antihyperglycemic agents or basal insulin therapy, as well as 
in T2DM patients with comorbid cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, or 
HF [ 14 ]. Commonly prescribed SGLT2is include dapagliflozin, empagliflozin, 
canagliflozin, and ertugliflozin. Numerous clinical trials have demonstrated that 
SGLT2is significantly reduce the composite endpoint of cardiovascular mortality 
and HF-related hospitalization in patients with both HFrEF and HFpEF [ 15 ,  16 ,  17 ]. 
SGLT2is also confer additional benefits, such as weight reduction, improved 
insulin sensitivity, decreased uric acid levels, and modest lowering of blood 
pressure [ 18 ]. In major heart failure trials, mean body weight reductions ranged 
between 1.5 and 2.5 kg within the first 6 months of therapy, and remained stable 
[ 19 ]. In Dapagliflozin And Prevention of Adverse-outcomes in Heart Failure 
(DAPA-HF), dapagliflozin led to an average weight loss of 1.8 kg compared with 
placebo at 8 months, while EMPEROR-Reduced and EMPEROR-Preserved trials reported 
similar findings [ 20 ]. Although SGLT2is are associated with an increased risk of 
urogenital infections and ketoacidosis, they are generally well tolerated in 
clinical practice, and most adverse effects are easily manageable [ 21 ]. Owing to 
their multifaceted mechanisms of action, SGLT2is have demonstrated remarkable 
efficacy and broad therapeutic potential in the management of T2DM and HF, 
offering new hope and expanded treatment options for patients.

3.1 Improving Hemodynamics and Reducing Interstitial Edema:
SGLT2is improve hemodynamics and reduce blood pressure by inducing osmotic 
diuresis, which decreases intravascular fluid volume [ 22 ] (Fig.  2 ). This 
reduction in blood pressure not only lowers the resistance to cardiac output 
(afterload) but also reduces venous return (preload), thereby alleviating the 
initial workload on the heart and enabling more efficient cardiac pumping [ 23 ]. 
Studies have reported a modest antihypertensive effect of SGLT2is, with an 
estimated average blood pressure reduction of 2.46/1.46 mm Hg [ 24 ]. Notably, this 
antihypertensive effect persists even in patients with impaired renal function, 
suggesting mechanisms beyond simple diuresis, including improved endothelial 
function, reduced arterial stiffness, and modulation of sympathetic nervous 
activity [ 25 ].
The reduction in preload is primarily achieved through diuretic and natriuretic 
effects, which decrease venous return [ 26 ]. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging 
studies have demonstrated reduced end-diastolic volume following treatment with 
empagliflozin, consistent with decreased preload [ 27 ]. These changes collectively 
reduce cardiac workload, particularly in patients with HF. The DAPA-HF trial 
showed that dapagliflozin reduced the risk of the composite endpoint of 
cardiovascular death or worsening HF by 26% compared to placebo, suggesting that 
SGLT2is may directly enhance blood flow by optimizing cardiac loading conditions 
[ 28 ]. In addition, SGLT2is indirectly promote vasodilation by improving 
endothelial function, further contributing to improved hemodynamics [ 29 ]. While 
the primary mechanism involves renal-mediated volume regulation, emerging 
evidence also points to direct effects on cardiac cells, such as reductions in 
inflammation and oxidative stress [ 30 ].
Interstitial edema, characterized by fluid accumulation in tissue interstices, 
is common in HF patients [ 31 ]. SGLT2is mitigate interstitial edema by increasing 
urine output and sodium excretion, thereby reducing fluid retention [ 32 ]. Studies 
suggest that the diuretic effect of SGLT2is preferentially targets interstitial 
fluid rather than solely reducing plasma volume [ 33 ]. Mathematical modeling has 
shown that dapagliflozin has a lesser impact on plasma volume compared to the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) enalapril, minimizing the risk of 
hypovolemia-induced reflex neurohumoral activation and electrolyte imbalances 
[ 34 ]. The RECEDE-CHF trial reported an increase in daily urine output of 545 mL 
with SGLT2is, of which 312 mL was electrolyte-free water clearance, contributing 
to the alleviation of fluid overload [ 35 ]. Although evidence on the long-term 
diuretic effects of SGLT2is remains inconsistent, these effects are considered 
beneficial in reducing pulmonary edema and improving congestive HF symptoms.

3.2 Regulation of Cardiac Metabolism:
SGLT2is exert multifaceted regulatory effects on cardiac metabolism in HF, by 
coordinated modulation of glucose, energy, and lipid metabolism [ 36 ]. By inducing 
mild ketosis, SGLT2is influence glucose metabolism by promoting lipolysis and 
reducing glucose utilization, thereby enhancing ketone body production [ 37 ]. 
These ketone bodies serve as an efficient energy substrate for the heart, which 
is particularly beneficial in improving cardiac function in HF [ 38 ]. Studies 
suggest that SGLT2is reduce glucose uptake in cardiomyocytes by inhibiting 
glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1), which is beneficial in HF patients with impaired 
metabolic function [ 39 ].
In individuals with marked insulin resistance or poorly controlled type 2 
diabetes, chronic suppression of glucose oxidation and elevated circulating free 
fatty acids create a highly inefficient metabolic environment [ 40 ]. Preclinical 
studies have shown that hearts from insulin-resistant models exhibit a greater 
shift toward ketone oxidation and mitochondrial coupling efficiency after SGLT2is 
exposure compared to non-diabetic controls [ 41 ]. Conversely, in non-diabetic or 
mildly insulin-resistant heart failure patients, baseline ketone oxidation is 
already relatively preserved, and the benefits of SGLT2is may derive more from 
systemic effects—such as improved renal—cardiac crosstalk, reduced 
inflammation, and enhanced autophagy—than solely from altering direct metabolic 
substrates [ 42 ]. Clinical metabolomic analyses from the DAPA-HF and EMPEROR 
studies have shown that although plasma ketone levels increase modestly in all 
patients, the correlation between increased ketones and clinical outcomes is 
strongest in those with higher baseline insulin resistance or hyperglycemia [ 43 ]. 
These findings support a model in which SGLT2is-mediated cardioprotection is 
multifactorial and context-dependent: the relative contribution of ketone 
metabolism predominates in metabolically impaired states, whereas hemodynamic and 
anti-inflammatory mechanisms may dominate in metabolically healthier individuals 
[ 42 ]. Recognizing this heterogeneity will be essential for tailoring therapeutic 
strategies and identifying patient subgroups that are most likely to benefit from 
SGLT2is-induced metabolic remodeling.
In terms of energy metabolism, SGLT2is enhances ATP production by promoting 
mitochondrial biogenesis and improving mitochondrial function [ 44 ]. They 
facilitate ketone body utilization, a metabolic pathway that is more efficient 
than fatty acid oxidation, thereby increasing the heart’s energy utilization 
efficiency [ 38 ]. Furthermore, SGLT2is appear to inhibit sodium–hydrogen 
exchanger 1 (NHE1), reducing intracellular sodium and calcium concentrations in 
cardiomyocytes [ 45 ]. This contributes to maintaining ion homeostasis and 
preventing calcium overload, which is critical for HF patients.
Regarding lipid metabolism, SGLT2is promote the oxidation of long-chain fatty 
acids, thereby reducing the accumulation of toxic lipid intermediates, a process 
particularly relevant in HF, where dysregulated lipid metabolism contributes to 
lipid accumulation and oxidative stress [ 46 ]. In addition, SGLT2is exert 
cardioprotective effects by modulating levels of lipid metabolism-related 
hormones, such as leptin and adiponectin [ 47 ].

3.3 Attenuation of Inflammatory Responses:
Chronic inflammation is a hallmark of HF, and SGLT2is mitigate this inflammatory 
state, thereby reducing myocardial injury [ 48 ]. Interleukin-1 β  
(IL-1 β ), a central mediator of the pro-inflammatory cascade, promotes 
cardiomyocyte apoptosis, endothelial dysfunction, and myocardial fibrosis [ 49 ]. 
SGLT2is suppresse the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inhibits 
the activation of nuclear factor  κ B (NF- κ B), directly blocking 
the assembly and activation of the NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) 
inflammasome, which in turn reduces the maturation and release of IL-1 β  
and IL-18 [ 50 ]. As a key transcription factor in inflammatory responses, 
NF- κ B inhibition by SGLT2is lowers both systemic and cardiac-localized 
inflammation, enhancing cardiomyocyte survival and vascular endothelial function 
[ 25 ]. This effect is mediated through the activation of AMP-activated protein 
kinase (AMPK) and inhibition of inhibitor-kappaB kinase  β  (IKK β ) 
phosphorylation, which prevents NF- κ B nuclear translocation and reduces 
the transcription of pro-inflammatory genes such as tumor necrosis 
factor- α  (TNF- α ), IL-6, and IL-8 [ 51 ].
Excessive activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
(STAT3) is associated with myocardial hypertrophy and fibrosis, and its 
inhibition mitigates pathological ventricular remodeling [ 52 ]. SGLT2is reduce 
IL-6 levels, thereby inhibiting Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/STAT3 phosphorylation and 
blocking pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic signaling pathways [ 53 ]. SGLT2is 
attenuate stimulation by interferon- γ  (IFN- γ ) and 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), reducing the expression of M1 macrophage markers such 
as inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and CD86 [ 54 ]. By activating peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor  γ  (PPAR γ ) and AMPK signaling, 
SGLT2is enhance the expression of M2 macrophage markers, including arginase 1 
(Arg1) and CD206, promoting anti-inflammatory and tissue repair mechanisms [ 55 ]. 
This shift in the M1/M2 macrophage balance toward M2 polarization reduces the 
release of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF- α , IL-1 β ) while 
increasing the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10, TGF- β ), 
thereby suppressing myocardial inflammation and fibrosis [ 56 ].
SGLT2is modulate immune responses by inhibiting the IL-6/STAT3 pathway, which 
reduces the generation of Th17 cells and promotes regulatory T cell (Treg) 
proliferation, thereby limiting excessive immune activation [ 57 ]. A decreased 
Th17/Treg ratio mitigates IL-17-mediated myocardial inflammation and fibrosis 
[ 58 ]. By alleviating hyperglycemia and oxidative stress, SGLT2is inhibit the 
release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) by neutrophils, reducing 
microvascular embolism and inflammatory damage in the myocardium [ 59 ]. NETs are 
critical mediators of myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury and HF progression, 
and their reduction helps protect the myocardial microcirculation [ 60 ].

3.4 Reduction of Oxidative Stress Injury:
Oxidative stress plays a pivotal role in the progression of HF, contributing to 
endothelial dysfunction, cardiac remodeling, and impaired contractility [ 25 ]. 
SGLT2is mitigate oxidative stress injury through multiple mechanisms. In mouse 
models of HF, empagliflozin significantly reduced cardiac ROS production while 
upregulating the expression of endogenous antioxidants [ 61 ]. SGLT2is may modulate 
intracellular sodium homeostasis by inhibiting NHE1 and the sodium channel 
Nav1.5, thereby attenuating oxidative stress [ 45 ].
Autophagy, a critical process for clearing damaged cellular components, 
particularly ROS-generating dysfunctional mitochondria, is enhanced by SGLT2is 
[ 62 ]. Studies indicate that SGLT2is promote autophagy by activating AMPK, SIRT1, 
and hypoxia-inducible factor pathways, facilitating the removal of these 
deleterious components [ 39 ]. Given the close interplay between oxidative stress 
and inflammation, the anti-inflammatory effects of SGLT2is may indirectly reduce 
oxidative stress [ 50 ]. By suppressing pro-inflammatory cytokines and modulating 
immune cell activity, SGLT2is mitigate oxidative damage due to inflammation [ 63 ].
SGLT2is reduce oxidative stress by altering myocardial energy substrate 
utilization, shifting from carbohydrates to more efficient substrates such as 
fatty acids and ketone bodies [ 37 ]. This metabolic shift enhances mitochondrial 
function, lowers ROS production, and further alleviates oxidative stress by 
improving insulin sensitivity and glucose control [ 9 ]. SGLT2is demonstrate 
significant reductions in oxidative stress in non-diabetic HF rat models, 
suggesting that their protective effects may be independent of glycemic control 
[ 64 ]. This indicates that SGLT2is exert broader cardioprotective effects through 
direct cardiac actions and metabolic regulation, beyond mechanisms associated 
with diabetes. Furthermore, SGLT2is enhance the antioxidant capacity of 
cardiomyocytes by activating antioxidant enzyme systems, providing additional 
protection against injury from oxidative stress [ 65 ].

3.5 Regulation of the Neuroendocrine System:
SGLT2is exert their therapeutic effects in HF through modulation of multiple 
neuroendocrine systems. The DAPA-HF trial evaluated the efficacy of dapagliflozin 
in HF, while the EMPEROR-Reduced and EMPEROR-Preserved trials investigated 
empagliflozin in HF patients with varying ejection fractions [ 66 ,  67 ,  68 ]. These 
trials demonstrated that SGLT2is significantly reduce cardiovascular mortality 
and HF hospitalization rates, suggesting a potential role in improving cardiac 
function through neuroendocrine regulation [ 7 ].
SGLT2is promote urinary excretion, reducing plasma sodium levels, which in turn 
lowers renin and aldosterone levels, thereby suppressing the activity of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) [ 32 ]. Studies have shown that 
SGLT2is, such as empagliflozin, significantly decrease plasma aldosterone levels 
in HF patients, contributing to reduced fluid retention and vasoconstriction 
[ 69 ]. Excessive RAAS activation in HF exacerbates fluid retention and vascular 
constriction, and its inhibition helps alleviate these pathological processes 
[ 70 ].
In HF, increased activation of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) leads to 
increases in heart rate, myocardial contractility, and vascular resistance. 
SGLT2is mitigate SNS activity by improving fluid balance and metabolic control 
[ 71 ]. Recent studies have reported decreased variability in heart rate and 
reduced resting heart rate following dapagliflozin treatment, indicating enhanced 
autonomic nervous system function, likely through decreased sympathetic activity, 
which reduces heart rate and cardiac workload [ 72 ].
Beyond their effects on traditional RAAS and SNS pathways, SGLT2is modulate 
additional hormones, such as brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and glucagon-like 
peptide-1 (GLP-1), offering novel insights into their broad therapeutic benefits. 
SGLT2is may lower BNP levels, which is a reflection of reduced cardiac stress 
[ 73 ]. GLP-1, a hormone with cardioprotective properties, enhances myocardial 
contractility and reduces apoptosis [ 74 ]. Dapagliflozin has been shown to 
increase GLP-1 levels, potentially providing additional protection by improving 
cardiac contractile function [ 6 ].

3.6 Suppression of Myocardial Fibrosis and Improvement of 
Ventricular Remodeling:
Ventricular remodeling is a central pathological process in the progression of 
HF, characterized by hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes, apoptosis, and interstitial 
fibrosis, leading to ventricular dilation and contractile dysfunction [ 75 ]. 
SGLT2is reduce blood volume through osmotic diuresis (sodium and glucose 
excretion), lowering preload, while also decreasing afterload, thereby reducing 
cardiac workload [ 32 ]. This alleviation of cardiac stress decreases energy 
demands, improves myocardial oxygen supply-demand balance, and suppresses 
compensatory cardiomyocyte hypertrophy [ 72 ]. SGLT2is indirectly inhibit NHE1 
activity in cardiomyocyte membranes, reducing intracellular sodium levels and 
subsequently attenuating sodium–calcium exchanger (NCX)-mediated calcium 
overload, which mitigates calcium-dependent contractile dysfunction and 
mitochondrial oxidative stress [ 45 ]. Increased phosphorylation of AMPK suppresses 
excessive mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activation, restoring the balance 
between autophagy and apoptosis, thereby reducing cardiomyocyte apoptosis and 
necrosis [ 76 ]. SGLT2is induce mild ketosis (elevated  β -hydroxybutyrate 
levels), promoting preferential myocardial utilization over free fatty acids, 
enhancing ATP production efficiency, and ameliorating deficits in myocardial 
energy metabolism [ 77 ]. This also reduces myocardial lipid accumulation and 
lipotoxicity-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress, preserving mitochondrial 
function [ 78 ].
Myocardial fibrosis, a key contributor to increased ventricular stiffness and 
diastolic dysfunction, is modulated by SGLT2is through multiple mechanisms. 
SGLT2is downregulate transforming growth factor-beta (TGF- β ) expression 
and inhibit Smad2/3 signaling, which attenuates fibroblast-to-myofibroblast 
transformation and collagen synthesis [ 79 ]. They upregulate matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP) activity to promote collagen degradation while inhibiting 
tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), thereby reversing excessive 
extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition [ 80 ]. Preclinical models indicate that 
short-term SGLT2is administration (2–4 weeks) can rapidly attenuate profibrotic 
signaling by downregulating TGF- β 1/Smad3 phosphorylation and suppressing 
inflammatory mediators such as IL-6 and TNF- α  [ 81 ]. In diabetic and 
pressure-overload rodent models, empagliflozin and dapagliflozin reduced 
myocardial TGF- β  expression and macrophage infiltration within 2–3 weeks 
of treatment, before significant changes in ECM content became apparent [ 82 ]. In 
contrast, long-term interventions (8–24 weeks in animal studies or  ≥ 6 
months in clinical trials) are associated with measurable reductions in collagen 
I/III deposition, normalization of MMP-2/MMP-9 activity, and improvements in 
myocardial stiffness and left ventricular mass [ 83 ]. These findings suggest that 
early anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative signaling precedes—and may causally 
mediate—the subsequent structural reversal of fibrosis. Cardiac magnetic 
resonance (CMR) and echocardiographic studies have demonstrated improvements in 
extracellular volume fraction (ECV) and left ventricle (LV) mass index typically 
after 6–12 months of therapy, whereas circulating markers of fibrosis (e.g., 
procollagen type I C-terminal propeptide (PICP), galectin-3) may decline within 
the first 3 months [ 84 ]. By suppressing nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate (NADPH) oxidase activity and enhancing superoxide dismutase (SOD) 
expression, SGLT2is reduce ROS levels, limiting oxidative damage [ 63 ]. In 
addition, they decrease levels of TNF- α , IL-6, IL-1 β , and 
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), inhibiting M1 macrophage polarization 
and localized myocardial inflammation [ 54 ]. Osmotic diuresis reduces activation 
of the RAAS, attenuating aldosterone-driven fibroblast proliferation and collagen 
synthesis [ 85 ].
The EMPEROR-Reduced trial demonstrated that SGLT2is significantly reduced left 
ventricular mass index (LVMI), which is indicative of the reversal of myocardial 
hypertrophy [ 8 ]. SGLT2is also limit ventricular dilation (reducing left 
ventricular end-systolic volume index (LVESVi)), restore sphericity index, and 
optimize contractile synchrony [ 27 ]. By reducing myocardial stiffness and the 
E/e ′  ratio, SGLT2is improve left ventricular filling pressure, alleviating 
diastolic dysfunction [ 86 ]. The DAPA-HF and EMPEROR-Reduced trials confirmed that 
dapagliflozin and empagliflozin significantly lowered the risk of cardiovascular 
death and HFrEF, with subgroup analyses revealing improvements in left 
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and reductions in N-terminal pro-B-type 
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) [ 7 ,  87 ]. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging 
studies have also shown that SGLT2is-treated groups exhibit reduced markers of 
myocardial fibrosis, such as ECV, 
and decreased myocardial fibrosis, and showed evidence of reverse ventricular 
remodeling [ 88 ].

4. Clinical Evidence and Therapeutic Potential of SGLT2is in HF:
SGLT2is have demonstrated significant efficacy and broad therapeutic potential 
in the treatment of HFrEF, HFpEF, and HFmrEF [ 28 ]. Several clinical trials have 
confirmed that SGLT2is significantly reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and 
HF hospitalization across a broad range of ejection fractions [ 7 ] (Table  1 , Ref. 
[ 7 ,  8 ,  10 ,  23 ,  35 ,  87 ,  89 ,  90 ,  91 ]). The DAPA-HF trial showed that dapagliflozin reduced 
the risk of cardiovascular death or HF hospitalization by 26% and all-cause 
mortality by 17% in HFrEF patients [ 87 ]. Similarly, the EMPEROR-Reduced trial 
demonstrated that empagliflozin reduced the risk of cardiovascular death or HF 
hospitalization by 25% in HFrEF patients, with benefits that were independent of 
the patient’s diabetes status [ 10 ]. The EMPEROR-Preserved trial was the first to 
show that empagliflozin reduced the risk of cardiovascular death or HF 
hospitalization by 21% in HFpEF patients, while the DELIVER trial reported an 
18% reduction in the risk of the primary endpoint in HFpEF patients with an LVEF 
 > 40% [ 89 ]. Subgroup analyses indicate consistent benefits in patients with an 
LVEF of 40%–49%, with reductions in cardiovascular death or the risk of HF 
hospitalization ranging from 22% to 25%, consistent with outcomes observed in 
patients with HFrEF and HFpEF [ 92 ].
SGLT2is also exhibit significant advantages in special high-risk populations, 
such as those with comorbid chronic kidney disease (CKD). Both dapagliflozin and 
empagliflozin significantly reduce the risk of cardiovascular death or HF 
hospitalization while slowing the progression of CKD [ 93 ]. Although SGLT2is are 
generally considered safe and well-tolerated, it is important to highlight the 
risk of euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis (eDKA), a rare but potentially 
life-threatening complication. However, emerging evidence suggests that this 
condition can occasionally occur in non-diabetic heart failure patients receiving 
SGLT2is, particularly during catabolic or increased stress conditions such as 
prolonged fasting, infection, perioperative periods, or excessive alcohol 
consumption [ 94 ]. In patients with advanced CKD, the risk–benefit balance 
requires particular attention. Reduced renal clearance may alter the handling of 
glucose and ketone, and CKD-related malnutrition or infection could predispose 
patients to ketosis under stress [ 95 ]. Therefore, clinicians should educate 
patients and caregivers to recognize early symptoms of ketoacidosis (nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, dyspnea) and advise temporary discontinuation of 
SGLT2is during acute illness, surgery, or reduced oral intake [ 96 ]. In patients 
with acute HF or worsening HF, SGLT2is, when used in combination therapy, 
increase urine output without compromising renal function [ 97 ]. SGLT2is also 
demonstrate synergistic effects when combined with conventional HF medications, 
further optimizing therapeutic outcomes [ 98 ].
The safety profile of SGLT2is in HF treatment has been extensively validated. 
Multiple large-scale randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and meta-analyses have 
confirmed that SGLT2is significantly reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and 
hospitalization across various HF phenotypes without introducing additional 
safety concerns [ 90 ,  99 ,  100 ]. Pooled analyses from the DAPA-HF and 
EMPEROR-Reduced trials demonstrated that dapagliflozin and empagliflozin 
significantly lowered mortality across the full range of ejection fractions, with 
adverse event rates comparable to placebo [ 7 ]. Real-world studies, such as the 
CVD-REAL study, further corroborate the safety of SGLT2is in HF management, 
showing high patient adherence and tolerability with low rates of adverse events 
[ 101 ].
Despite the significant advancements achieved with SGLT2is in the management of 
HF, further in-depth studies are needed to elucidate their molecular mechanisms 
and cellular signaling pathways to develop more effective therapeutic strategies 
and optimize drug combinations. Future research should prioritize large-scale, 
long-term RCTs to rigorously evaluate the efficacy and safety of SGLT2is across 
diverse patient populations, with a particular emphasis on HFpEF and specific 
subgroups. These subgroups include, but are not limited to, patients with LVEF 
 > 60%, elderly patients (aged  ≥ 75 years), those with advanced CKD, and 
individuals with comorbidities such as obesity, atrial fibrillation, or pulmonary 
hypertension [ 91 ]. The burden of HF is particularly higher in older adults, yet 
elderly patients ( ≥ 75 years) remain underrepresented in major RCTs. 
Subgroup analyses from landmark trials have nonetheless provided consistent 
evidence that the efficacy of SGLT2is extends to this population. In 
DAPA-HF, approximately 24% of participants were aged  ≥ 75 years, and the 
relative risk reduction for the composite endpoint of cardiovascular death or 
worsening HF was similar to that in younger cohorts [ 102 ]. The EMPEROR-Reduced 
and EMPEROR-Preserved trials demonstrated no attenuation of treatment benefit 
with increasing age, confirming that SGLT2is’ cardioprotective effects are 
age-independent [ 103 ]. In the various trials, the incidence of key adverse 
events—such as volume depletion, genital infections, and decline in renal 
function—was only modestly increased in older participants, with no significant 
increase in hypoglycemia or ketoacidosis [ 104 ]. SGLT2is initiation was well 
tolerated even in patients with advanced age and moderate CKD, supporting their 
feasibility in geriatric practice when appropriately monitored. Future trials 
should investigate the efficacy of SGLT2is in underrepresented populations, such 
as those with genetic predispositions to HF or non-Caucasian ethnic groups, to 
ensure the broad applicability of these findings.
Optimizing the combination of SGLT2is with other HF therapies, including RAAS 
inhibitors,  β -blockers, MRAs, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists 
(GLP-1RAs), and angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors (ARNIs), is critical 
for achieving therapeutic synergy and minimizing adverse effects [ 105 ]. SGLT2is 
promote mild osmotic diuresis and natriuresis, which may potentiate the 
volume-depleting effects of loop diuretics. In the DAPA-HF and EMPEROR trials, a 
modest increase in volume-related adverse events (e.g., hypotension, dehydration) 
was observed when high-dose loop diuretics were co-administered [ 102 ]. 
Accordingly, clinicians should consider gradual uptitration or a temporary 
reduction in the dose of loop diuretics when initiating SGLT2is, particularly in 
euvolemic or frail patients. No clinically significant pharmacokinetic 
interactions have been reported between SGLT2is and ARNIs. However, both classes 
can reduce blood pressure and promote natriuresis, which may increase the risk of 
symptomatic hypotension, especially in elderly or CKD patients [ 95 ]. Careful 
monitoring of blood pressure and renal function during the early phase of 
combination therapy is recommended. No major pharmacokinetic interactions are 
known, and evidence suggests additive benefits on cardiac remodeling and 
reductions in mortality [ 84 ]. Nonetheless, caution is warranted when SGLT2is are 
introduced in patients with borderline renal function or those at risk for 
hyperkalemia, as concurrent MRAs therapy may amplify these effects.
Personalized treatment strategies tailored to individual patient 
characteristics—such as comorbidities (e.g., T2DM, CKD, or coronary artery 
disease), renal function (e.g., eGFR levels), baseline LVEF, and frailty 
status—are essential to enhance treatment efficacy and safety. Natriuretic 
peptides (BNP, NT-proBNP) are well-established indicators of ventricular stress 
and may identify patients most likely to experience rapid hemodynamic improvement 
with SGLT2is [ 106 ]. Early reductions in NT-proBNP after initiation have been 
correlated with improved outcomes in both HFrEF and HFpEF populations [ 107 ]. 
Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and albuminuria are key determinants 
of both efficacy and tolerability [ 108 ]. Clinical data suggest that SGLT2is 
retain cardiorenal protective effects as low as eGFR thresholds of 20–25 
mL/min/1.73 m 2 , but initial eGFR decline and long-term slope stabilization 
vary by baseline renal status [ 109 ]. Parameters such as HbA1c, fasting ketone 
levels, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) may provide additional 
insights into metabolic adaptation and residual inflammatory risk during therapy 
[ 110 ].
A major paradigm shift introduced by large-scale randomized trials was the 
observation that the cardiovascular and renal benefits of SGLT2is extend 
beyond glucose lowering. Subgroup analyses from pivotal trials—including 
DAPA-HF, EMPEROR-Reduced, and EMPEROR-Preserved—have consistently shown that 
the relative risk reduction in heart failure hospitalization and cardiovascular 
death with SGLT2is therapy is comparable in patients with and without T2DM [ 76 ]. In trial DAPA-HF trial, for example, 
dapagliflozin reduced the composite outcome of worsening HF or cardiovascular 
death by 26% in patients without T2DM, closely matching the 25% reduction 
observed in those with T2DM [ 106 ]. Similar findings were reported in the 
EMPEROR-Reduced and DELIVER trials, underscoring that SGLT2is confer 
cardioprotective effects independent of glycemic status [ 103 ,  109 ]. However, 
subtle distinctions do exist between diabetic and non-diabetic HF populations. 
Patients with T2DM tend to have a higher baseline risk of renal dysfunction, 
volume overload, and microvascular disease, which may increase the absolute risk 
reduction observed with SGLT2is [ 107 ]. Conversely, non-diabetic HF patients may 
exhibit greater improvements in metabolic efficiency and myocardial energetics, 
albeit with slightly increased vigilance required for the development of volume 
depletion or euglycemic ketoacidosis [ 96 ]. Long-term safety monitoring of SGLT2is 
in non-diabetic HF patients is particularly important, especially for potential 
risks such as diabetic ketoacidosis, urogenital infections, and volume depletion 
[ 18 ]. Expanded real-world evidence studies and post-marketing surveillance are 
needed to assess these risks over extended periods and in varied clinical 
contexts. Furthermore, future research should clarify the optimal timing and 
sequencing of SGLT2is initiation relative to other HF therapies, particularly in 
patients with acute HF or recent decompensation [ 100 ]. Through these 
comprehensive research efforts, SGLT2is have the potential to further transform 
the landscape of HF management, offering improved prognosis and quality of life 
for a broader patient population.

5. Conclusions:
SGLT2is exhibit remarkable efficacy and considerable potential in the management 
of HF. These agents exert their therapeutic effects through multiple mechanisms, 
including optimization of hemodynamics, regulation of cardiac metabolism, 
attenuation of inflammatory responses and oxidative stress, modulation of 
neuroendocrine pathways, and suppression of myocardial fibrosis. SGLT2is 
demonstrate robust performance in special populations and when used in 
combination with other HF therapies. Their safety has been consistently validated 
across numerous studies, with low rates of adverse events. Future research should 
prioritize elucidating the molecular mechanisms of SGLT2is, conducting additional 
large-scale clinical trials, exploring optimal combination therapies, developing 
personalized treatment strategies, and monitoring long-term safety in 
non-diabetic HF patients. With these advancements, SGLT2is are poised to play an 
increasingly pivotal role in the treatment of HF, thereby enhancing patient 
prognosis and quality of life.

Author Contributions:
ZH, GL, CF, ZW, SY, CL and BZ were responsible for the conception and design of the 
study, data analysis, and drafting of the manuscript. ZH, CZ and GL participated 
in data acquisition and interpretation. ZH, CL, and BZ contributed to the 
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. CL and BZ 
supervised the overall project, provided guidance throughout the study, and were 
responsible for the final approval of the version to be published. All authors 
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. All authors have participated sufficiently in the work and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate:
Not applicable.

Funding:
This research was funded by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (Grant No.82360066) and the Natural Science Foundation of Guangxi (Grant 
No.2025GXNSFAA069056).

Conflict of Interest:
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
