[DOCUMENT METADATA]
Title: Comparison of Clinical Efficacy and Safety of Tirzepatide, Liraglutide and Semaglutide in Patients with Obesity and Without T2D: A Bayesian Network Meta-Analysis of Randomised Controlled Trials
Year: 2026
Type: clinical_trial
Drugs: semaglutide, liraglutide, tirzepatide
Keywords: not specified
Domain: Type 2 Diabetes Drug Interactions
[END METADATA]

[SECTION: INTRODUCTION]
Obesity is a growing global epidemic; in 2022, over 890 million adults worldwide had obesity, representing around 16% of the world’s adult population [ 1 ]. Obesity is associated with premature death [ 2 ] and numerous health complications, including type 2 diabetes (T2D), metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), hypertension, cardiovascular disease and obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) [ 3 ]. Current recommendations for managing obesity vary and are dependent on a patient’s body mass index (BMI), waist circumference and complications, and should target a range of obesity-related health parameters [ 3 – 7 ]. Treatment options may include a combination of behavioural interventions, such as dietary changes and physical activity programmes. For patients requiring additional therapeutic measures, obesity management medications (OMMs), endoscopic interventions or bariatric/metabolic surgery may be considered [ 8 ,  9 ].
The most recent OMMs include the glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists (RAs) semaglutide and liraglutide, and the glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1 RA tirzepatide which combines both agonisms into a single molecule. Semaglutide 2.4 mg and tirzepatide 5, 10 and 15 mg are administered once-weekly (QW) and liraglutide 3 mg once-daily (QD) via subcutaneous injection, and all are approved for weight management in several regions [ 10 – 18 ].
SURMOUNT-1, a phase 3 clinical trial of tirzepatide in patients with obesity, or overweight with obesity-related complications, demonstrated the efficacy and safety of tirzepatide versus placebo, both adjunct to a reduced-calorie diet and increased physical activity [ 19 ].
However, current evidence of the comparative efficacy of tirzepatide versus other obesity treatments is relatively limited. The head-to-head open-label study SURMOUNT-5, which was published after this analysis was conducted, directly compares the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of tirzepatide (10 or 15 mg) with semaglutide MTD (1.7 or 2.4 mg) for obesity treatment. However, SURMOUNT-5 was not deemed relevant for comparison as the use of MTD meant it was not possible to distinguish which dose the efficacy response was associated with and was therefore not directly translatable to the dosing used in SURMOUNT-1 and STEP 1. However, this trial demonstrated that tirzepatide had a statistically significantly greater reduction in body weight and waist circumference versus semaglutide [ 20 ]. In terms of indirect evidence, published network-meta analyses (NMAs) compared a broad range of treatments for obesity and overweight [ 21 ,  22 ], and tirzepatide and semaglutide have been compared via an indirect treatment comparison (ITC) and a cohort study [ 23 ,  24 ]. However, there is no published analysis which exclusively compares tirzepatide with both semaglutide and liraglutide at all doses licensed for weight reduction in patients without T2D and without concurrent intensive behavioural therapy. Thus, this NMA assesses the efficacy and safety of tirzepatide for the treatment of obesity and overweight versus semaglutide and liraglutide in adults (≥ 18 years) with either obesity (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 ) or overweight (BMI ≥ 27 to < 30 kg/m 2 ) with at least one obesity-related complication, both without T2D.

[SECTION: METHODS]
Based on a systematic literature review (SLR) and Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA), the efficacy and safety of semaglutide 2.4 mg, liraglutide 3 mg and tirzepatide 5, 10 and 15 mg were compared in adults without type 2 diabetes, and with either obesity (body mass index [BMI] ≥ 30 kg/m 2 ) or overweight (BMI ≥ 27 kg/m 2 ) with ≥ 1 obesity-related complication.

[SECTION: RESULTS]
Following a stringent heterogeneity assessment, six of 42 randomised controlled trials identified in the SLR were included in the NMA. Efficacy estimand results showed all tirzepatide doses were associated with statistically greater improvements in weight reduction outcomes versus liraglutide, and for tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg versus semaglutide: including percentage weight reduction (− 12.86% for tirzepatide 10 mg and − 13.95% for tirzepatide 15 mg versus liraglutide; − 4.85% and − 6.26% versus semaglutide) and waist circumference (− 11.79 cm and − 12.30 cm versus liraglutide; − 4.81 cm and − 5.32 cm versus semaglutide). All tirzepatide doses were associated with statistically greater improvements in triglycerides and diastolic blood pressure versus liraglutide, and generally comparable improvements in other glycaemic, lipid and blood pressure parameters versus liraglutide and semaglutide. All interventions had a comparable safety profile.

[SECTION: CONCLUSION]
Based on a comprehensive SLR and heterogeneity assessment, the NMA showed that all tirzepatide doses were associated with statistically greater improvements in weight reduction outcomes versus liraglutide, and for tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg versus semaglutide. All tirzepatide doses were associated with statistically greater improvements in triglycerides and diastolic blood pressure versus liraglutide, and generally comparable improvements in other glycaemic, lipid and blood pressure parameters versus liraglutide and semaglutide. The safety profile for tirzepatide was generally comparable to both liraglutide 3 mg and semaglutide 2.4 mg. In summary, the NMA supports the clinical effectiveness and safety of tirzepatide relative to liraglutide 3 mg and semaglutide 2.4 mg in weight reduction and other clinical outcomes targeted in the management of obesity and overweight for patients without T2D.
These results align with findings from previous NMAs, ITCs and the head-to-head SURMOUNT-5 trial, where the NMA results support the relative strength of tirzepatide compared to liraglutide and semaglutide in achieving weight reduction and reducing cardiometabolic risk factors among patients with obesity or overweight.

Supplementary Information:
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material. Supplementary file1 (PDF)

Key Summary Points:
Why carry out this study? Obesity is a growing global epidemic, associated with premature death and numerous health complications. There is no published analysis which exclusively compares the obesity management medications tirzepatide with both semaglutide and liraglutide at all doses licensed for weight management in patients without type 2 diabetes and without concurrent intensive behavioural therapy. This study indirectly compares the efficacy and safety of tirzepatide with both semaglutide and liraglutide for weight management using Bayesian network meta-analysis (NMA). What was learned from this study? In this NMA, tirzepatide was associated with improved or comparable efficacy versus semaglutide and liraglutide for weight management in patients with obesity or overweight. All interventions had a comparable safety profile.

Data Sources:
A clinical systematic literature review (SLR) was conducted in November 2023 and identified relevant randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in participants with obesity and overweight. The SLR searched a variety of sources including electronic databases, conference abstracts, clinical trial registries and reference lists of published clinical SLRs. The SLR conformed to Cochrane principles and Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Literature Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [ 25 – 27 ], and the criteria were specified to align with the patient/population, intervention, comparison, outcomes, time, and study type (PICOTS) listed in Supplementary Material Table  S1 . Risk of bias was assessed using the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomised trials [ 28 ].

Heterogeneity Assessment:
Based on stringent eligibility criteria (Supplementary Material Fig.  S2 ), the heterogeneity assessment identified six RCTs suitable for the NMA (SURMOUNT-1, STEP 1, 5 and 8, O’Neil, and SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes [ 19 ,  36 – 40 ]). These studies were deemed to be comparable in terms of their study design, where most studies were double-blind and multinational, with representation from Europe, North America, South America, Asia, Africa and Oceania. The only exception was STEP 8, which was only double-blind between the treatment and matched placebo and not between the active treatments due to differences in dosing, and which took place in a single country. All studies had estimands which aligned with the definitions of treatment regimen and efficacy estimands, except for SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes which did not report on the efficacy estimand. Specifications of the background therapy (adjunct to reduced-calorie diet and increased physical activity) were comparable across trials. Sample sizes varied widely between studies, from 239 in O’Neil to 4974 in SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes (Table  1 ); however, each treatment had at least one study with over 1000 participants (SURMOUNT-1 for tirzepatide, SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes for liraglutide, and STEP 1 for semaglutide). Table 1 Descriptive statistics of patient characteristics across studies Characteristic Study name O'Neil, 2018 SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes STEP 1 STEP 5 STEP 8 SURMOUNT-1 Sample size 239 4974 1961 304 338 2539 Age (years), mean (SD) 47.3 (12.3) 45.1 (12.1) 46.3 (12.7) 47.4 (11) 49.1 (13.2) 44.9 (12.5) Female (%) 65.0 78.4 74.1 77.6 78.4 67.5 Male (%) 35.0 21.6 25.9 22.4 21.6 32.5 Race/ethnicity a  (%)  American Indian or Alaska Native – 0.3 – 1 – 9.1  Asian – 3.7 13.3 0.7 3.8 10.9  Black or African American 7.9 9.5 5.7 4 18.9 7.9  White 73.2 85 75.1 93.1 73.7 70.6  Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander – – – – – 0.3  Other 3.1 1.5 5.9 1.3 3.5 1.2  Hispanic – 10.6 12 12.8 11.5 47.8 Prediabetes (%) – 61.2 43.7 46.4 36.1 40.7 Waist circumference (cm), mean (SD) 118.1 (15.1) 114.8 (14.4) 114.7 (14.7) 115.8 (14.9) 113.3 (15.6) 114.1 (15.2) Body weight (kg), mean (SD) 111.8 (24.1) 106.2 (21.5) 105.3 (21.9) 106.1 (22.0) 104.5 (23.9) 104.8 (22.1) BMI, mean (SD) 39.5 (7.0) 38.3 (6.4) 37.9 (6.6) 38.6 (7.0) 37.5 (6.9) 38.0 (6.8) HbA1c %, mean (SD) 5.5 (0.4) 5.6 (0.4) 5.7 (0.3) 5.7 (0.4) 5.5 (0.3) 5.6 (0.4) T2D (%) 0 0 0 0 0 0 OSA (%) – – 11.7 16.8 18.1 7.8 “–” indicates missing data,  BMI  body mass index,  HbA1c  glycated haemoglobin,  OSA  obstructive sleep apnoea,  SD  standard deviation,  T2D  type 2 diabetes mellitus.  a In most studies, participants could report on more than one race or ethnicity category, meaning that the total reported percentages add to more than 100%
Potential primary treatment effect modifiers were identified from a previous ITC of GLP-1 RAs to be sex, glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) and body weight [ 41 ]. Based on clinical opinion, potential secondary treatment effect modifiers were identified as race/ethnicity, proportion of diabetic/prediabetic participants at baseline, and OSA. Despite some minor deviations in aggregate baseline characteristics, including sex, percentage of participants that were Hispanic and percentage of participants with prediabetes at baseline, the study populations were deemed to be sufficiently comparable in terms of treatment effect modifiers (Table  1 ).
The placebo arm results for the efficacy estimand were generally similar, with some differences between trials observed for the reduction in triglycerides, fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and systolic blood pressure (SBP, Supplementary Material Table  S3 ). These results differed slightly from the treatment regimen estimand placebo responses (Supplementary Material Table  S4 ), which saw some differences in FPG, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and total cholesterol, and larger differences in the placebo response for prediabetes reversal. For the safety population, some differences in placebo results were observed across trials (Supplementary Material Table  S3 ). This may have resulted from the timing of the study relative to the COVID-19 pandemic (SURMOUNT-1 and STEP during, O’Neil and SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes prior), which may have impacted the reporting of safety events. Furthermore, safety data were collected using different methods, such as check boxes questionnaires, open format questionnaires, or verbal questioning, which may also have contributed to heterogeneity across safety outcomes.
The NMA was based on data for the primary timepoints of all studies, except STEP 5 where data from the secondary timepoint was used. The timepoints used—week 52 (O’Neil and STEP 5), week 56 (SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes), week 68 (STEP 1 and STEP 8) and week 72 (SURMOUNT-1)—were considered broadly comparable, as the treatments were designed to reach full efficacy in this timeframe, and given the plateau observed across weight reduction outcomes around week 52 [ 19 ,  36 – 40 ].

NMA:
Bayesian methods were used to conduct the NMA using OpenBUGS and R (version 4.2.1 or later) software [ 29 ] in line with key guidance documents [ 30 – 33 ]. For efficacy outcomes, separate analyses were conducted for both the efficacy estimand (participants remaining on randomised treatment for the entire study period, aligning with the European Medicines Agency [EMA] on-treatment strategy [ 34 ]) and the treatment regimen estimand (participants on randomised treatment, regardless of adherence, aligning with the EMA treatment-policy strategy [ 34 ]). The safety population was used for safety outcomes.
For continuous outcomes (change from baseline), a normal distribution with an identity link was specified. For binomial outcomes (patients experiencing an event) a binomial model with a logit link was specified. All outcomes were analysed using fixed effects and random effects models. Models adjusting for baseline risk were also fitted but generally had poor convergence and were not selected. Where the deviance information criteria were similar (difference of < 5), random effects models were chosen over fixed effects models, as they do not require strong assumptions of homogeneity. Model parameters were estimated using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (Supplementary Material  S1 ) and vague priors were specified for all basic model parameters, with prior distribution parameters modified according to the scale of the outcome. Details of convergence assessment is provided in the supplementary materials (Supplementary Material  S1 ). Where random effect models showed evidence that the between-study standard deviation τ had not updated after drawing MCMC samples, additional models using informative priors for τ were fitted based on the approach described by Turner et al.:  \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\tau }^{2}\sim {\mathrm{lognormal}}\left(-2.56, {1.74}^{2}\right)$$\end{document} τ 2 ∼ lognormal - 2.56 , 1.74 2  [ 35 ].

Ethical Approval:
This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.

SLR:
The clinical SLR identified 42 unique RCTs for adults (≥ 18 years) with either obesity or overweight with at least one obesity-related complication which reported on the interventions of interest (tirzepatide, semaglutide and liraglutide). Further details are provided in the SLR PRISMA diagram (Supplementary Material Fig.  S1 ). The studies included in the NMA had low risk of bias (Supplementary Material Table  S2 ) [ 28 ]. The head-to-head study SURMOUNT-5, which compared tirzepatide and semaglutide, was published in May 2025, so after the SLR was conducted and therefore was not included in the NMA [ 20 ].

NMA Results:
The NMA was conducted for the network in Fig.  1 . However, not all studies were included in each analysis due to lack of reporting on all outcomes by each individual study (see Supplementary Material Tables  S5 – S7 ). Due to a similar model fit, random effects models were chosen over fixed effects models for all outcomes. Results are presented in Table  2  (efficacy estimand; safety outcomes) and Supplementary Material Table  S8  (treatment regimen estimand). Efficacy results discussed in this section are based on the efficacy estimand (unless specified otherwise), as this captures the maximum potential treatment effect of the intervention. However, results were generally similar between the treatment regimen and efficacy estimands. Table 2 NMA results: efficacy estimand and safety outcomes, random effects models “–” indicates that no data were available for this comparison. Dark green indicates where tirzepatide performed statistically better compared to the comparator; light green indicates where tirzepatide performed numerically better compared to the comparator; dark red indicates where tirzepatide performed statistically worse compared to the comparator; light red indicates where tirzepatide performed numerically worse compared to the comparator.  a Model used an informative prior for between-study standard deviation AE  adverse event,  BMI  body mass index,  CfB  change from baseline,  DBP  diastolic blood pressure,  FPG  fasting plasma glucose,  GI  gastrointestinal,  HbA1c  glycated haemoglobin,  HDL  high-density lipoprotein,  MD  mean difference,  LDL  low-density lipoprotein,  OR  odds ratio,  QD  once daily,  QW  once weekly,  SBP  systolic blood pressure

Weight Reduction:
Versus liraglutide, tirzepatide 5, 10 and 15 mg were associated with statistically greater percentage (%) and absolute (kg) weight reductions, with mean differences [MD] of − 7.52%, − 12.86% and − 13.95%, respectively (Fig.  2  and Table  2 ). Versus semaglutide, tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with greater percentage weight reductions (%) (MD − 3.78% and − 4.86%, respectively) and statistically greater absolute weight reductions (kg) (Fig.  2 ; Table  2 ). However, tirzepatide 15 mg was associated with a statistically greater percentage (%) weight reduction versus semaglutide for the treatment regimen estimand (Supplementary Material Table  S8 ). These comparative results align with the arm-level results for respective trials, with liraglutide having the smallest change from baseline (range − 6.6% to − 9.2%), followed by tirzepatide 5 mg (− 16.0%), semaglutide (range − 16.6% to − 17.1%), tirzepatide 10 mg (− 21.4%) and tirzepatide 15 mg (− 22.5%) (Supplementary Material Table  S9 ). Fig. 1 Network diagram. Network of comparisons for the NMA between tirzepatide 5, 10 and 15 mg, liraglutide 3.0 mg and semaglutide 2.4 mg via the common comparator, placebo. This diagram represents the majority of networks analysed in the NMA, but studies were excluded from networks for particular outcomes where the study did not report on the outcome. The nodes correspond to treatments, and solid straight lines correspond to studies.  NMA  network meta-analysis,  QD  every day,  QW  every week Fig. 2 Weight reduction results (efficacy estimand). Forest plots for NMA results for the efficacy estimand comparing tirzepatide (5, 10 and 15 mg) versus semaglutide, liraglutide and placebo for  a  change from baseline in weight (%) and  b  change from baseline in waist circumference (%). The point indicates the mean difference and the lines indicate the 95% CrIs. For both outcomes, the point estimate on the left of the dotted line indicates where tirzepatide is associated with improvements over semaglutide, liraglutide and placebo, and statistical significance is indicated where the 95% CrIs do not overlap the dotted line.  CrI  credible interval,  MD  mean difference,  NMA  network meta-analysis
For target weight reduction (Table  2  and Supplementary Material Fig.  S3 ) versus liraglutide, tirzepatide 5, 10 and 15 mg were associated with statistically higher odds of participants achieving ≥ 5%, ≥ 10%, ≥ 15% and ≥ 20% weight reduction. Versus semaglutide, tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with numerically higher odds of participants achieving ≥ 5%, ≥ 10% and ≥ 15% weight reduction, and statistically higher odds of participants achieving ≥ 20% weight reduction. Additionally, tirzepatide 15 mg had the lowest number needed to treat (NNT) (Supplementary Material Table  S10 ) across all weight reduction thresholds, where an additional patient achieving ≥ 5%, ≥ 10%, ≥ 15% or ≥ 20% weight reduction would be observed if treating 1.46, 1.31, 1.39 or 1.60 patients, respectively, with tirzepatide 15 mg rather than placebo.

Glycaemic Parameters:
Versus liraglutide, tirzepatide 15 mg was associated with a statistically greater reduction in FPG (mg/dL) and a numerically greater reduction in HbA1c (%), while tirzepatide 5 and 10 mg were associated with numerically greater reductions in both FPG and HbA1c. Versus semaglutide, tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with numerically greater reductions in FPG and HbA1c (Table  2 ). Due to lack of comparator data, an NMA of prediabetes reversal was not feasible for the efficacy estimand. For the treatment regimen estimand, all tirzepatide doses were associated with numerically higher odds of participants with prediabetes achieving reversal versus liraglutide and semaglutide (Supplementary Material Table  S8 ), although the higher proportion of patients with prediabetes achieving reversal in the placebo arm of SURMOUNT-1 compared with SCALE and STEP 1 suggests that the relative efficacy of tirzepatide versus liraglutide and semaglutide may be underestimated (Supplementary Material Table  S4 ).

Waist Circumference:
Tirzepatide 5, 10 and 15 mg were associated with statistically greater reductions in waist circumference versus liraglutide (MD − 7.02, − 11.79 and − 12.30 cm, respectively). Tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with statistically greater reductions in waist circumference versus semaglutide (MD − 4.81 and − 5.32 cm, respectively) (Table  2  and Fig.  2 ).

Lipid Outcomes:
Versus liraglutide, all tirzepatide doses were associated with statistically greater improvements in triglycerides (%), and numerically greater improvements in high-density lipoprotein (HDL, %), LDL (%) and total cholesterol (%). Versus semaglutide, tirzepatide 15 mg was associated with a statistically greater improvement in triglycerides, and numerically greater improvements in HDL, LDL and total cholesterol (Table  2 ).

Blood Pressure:
Tirzepatide 10 mg was associated with a numerically greater decrease in SBP and tirzepatide 5 and 15 mg numerically smaller decreases in SBP (mmHg) compared with liraglutide. All tirzepatide doses were associated with statistically greater decreases versus liraglutide. Versus semaglutide, tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with numerically greater decreases in SBP (mmHg) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP, mmHg) (Table  2 ).

Safety:
All treatments had a generally comparable safety profile (Table  2 ).
Versus liraglutide, all tirzepatide doses were associated with numerically lower odds of patients experiencing total gastrointestinal adverse events (AEs), all-cause discontinuation and discontinuation due to AEs. Tirzepatide 5 mg was associated with numerically lower odds and tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with numerically higher odds of experiencing nausea AEs compared with liraglutide, and all tirzepatide doses were associated with numerically higher odds of experiencing severe gastrointestinal AEs compared with liraglutide.
Versus semaglutide, all tirzepatide doses were associated with numerically higher odds of experiencing severe gastrointestinal AEs and numerically lower odds of all-cause discontinuation. For nausea AEs and discontinuation due to AE, tirzepatide 5 mg was associated with numerically lower odds versus semaglutide. Tirzepatide 5 and 15 mg were associated with numerically lower odds of experiencing total gastrointestinal AEs compared with semaglutide. Fewer events in the placebo arm of SURMOUNT-1 compared with O’Neil, STEP 1 and STEP 8 for total gastrointestinal AEs and nausea AEs suggest that the relative safety of tirzepatide versus liraglutide and semaglutide may be underestimated for these outcomes (see Supplementary Material Table  S3 ).

Key Study Findings:
The findings from the NMA support the clinical effectiveness and safety of tirzepatide compared with semaglutide and liraglutide, for multiple clinical outcomes considered in the management of obesity and overweight in patients without T2D, including weight reduction and cardiometabolic risk factors, such as waist circumference, lipids, blood pressure and glycaemic parameters. Compared with liraglutide, all tirzepatide doses were associated with statistically greater efficacy in weight reduction outcomes and tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with statistically or numerically greater efficacy in glycaemic parameters and lipid outcomes. For blood pressure, tirzepatide was associated with statistically greater efficacy for DBP and broadly comparable efficacy for SBP. Compared with semaglutide, tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg were associated with statistically or numerically improved efficacy for weight reduction, glycaemic parameters and blood pressure. For lipid outcomes, tirzepatide 15 mg was associated with statistically or numerically improved efficacy versus semaglutide whereas there was no clear trend for tirzepatide 5 and 10 mg. Results for the efficacy outcomes were generally similar across the efficacy and treatment regimen estimands. For safety outcomes, the results for tirzepatide were generally similar to both semaglutide and liraglutide.
To contextualise the weight reduction outcomes, NNTs were produced and are presented in Supplementary Material Table  S10 . These results demonstrated that tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg had the lowest NNT, where an additional patient achieving the 5% weight reduction threshold would be observed if treating an additional 1.47 and 1.46 patients with tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg, respectively, rather than placebo. Previous literature has demonstrated that these thresholds are clinically meaningful within-patients [ 21 ,  22 ,  41 ]; however, a recent ITC suggested that ≥ 5% weight reduction may be no longer clinically relevant [ 23 ].
SURMOUNT-5 was not included in the NMA as it was published after the SLR was conducted; however, the NMA results were generally consistent with the SURMOUNT-5 head-to-head [ 20 ]. At week 72, for the efficacy estimand, tirzepatide MTD had greater reductions in percentage weight versus semaglutide MTD (mean [95% confidence interval (CI)] − 6.2% [− 7.8, − 4.6]) and waist circumference (− 5.4% [− 7.1, − 3.7]). These are similar in magnitude, albeit slightly improved, to the reductions observed for the efficacy estimand for tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg versus semaglutide 2.4 mg in this NMA (mean [95% CrI] weight reduction − 3.78% [− 6.99, 3.66], − 4.86 [− 8.07, 2.67]; waist circumference − 4.81 [− 6.63, − 2.36], − 5.32 [− 7.14, − 2.86]). However, the wider credible intervals in this NMA resulted in a non-significant result for weight reduction.
While some of this variation in results is likely attributable to the inherent variability of results between trials, some variation may be attributable to the slight differences in the patient populations between trials, where patients receiving tirzepatide in SURMOUNT-5 had a higher average waist circumference and body weight at baseline (mean [standard deviation (SD)] waist circumference 117.7 [16.1]; body weight 112.7 kg [24.8]) [ 20 ], compared with SURMOUNT-1 as used in the NMA (mean [SD] waist circumference 114.1 cm [15.2]; body weight 104.8 kg [22.1]) [ 42 ]. Therefore, the patients in SURMOUNT-5 had a greater amount of weight which could be lost compared to patients in SURMOUNT-1. Lastly, the wider CrIs in the NMA compared with the CI in SURMOUNT-5 may be explained by the use of a Bayesian analysis with random effect for the NMA, resulting in greater uncertainty in the results introduced by the heterogeneity of multiple trials per treatment comparison in the NMA.
Additionally, both efficacy and safety results were in line with findings from previous NMAs, although the estimands used in these NMAs were unclear [ 21 ,  22 ]. Compared with Pan et al. [ 21 ], our effect sizes were much greater for weight reduction (%). This difference may be due to the estimand choice of Pan et al., which is not reported, and the influence of additional studies that did not match our target population as Pan et al.’s NMA had much broader eligibility criteria, with some studies including participants with T2D or using intensive behavioural therapy. Compared with Alkhezi et al. [ 22 ], estimates from our NMA were similar for weight reduction (%), though with wider credible intervals in our study resulting in a non-significant result for tirzepatide 15 mg versus semaglutide 2.4 mg. This is likely a result of our NMA using a smaller set of studies to better reflect clinical practice, including only those which report on doses of semaglutide and liraglutide approved for weight management and excluding those using intensive behavioural therapy. However, our results support the conclusion that tirzepatide 15 mg, followed by tirzepatide 10 mg, had better efficacy and a similar safety profile compared with other GLP-1 RAs.
Furthermore, weight reduction results were mostly in line with a previous ITC between tirzepatide and semaglutide, which demonstrated greater weight reduction for tirzepatide 10 and 15 mg versus semaglutide 2.4 mg [ 23 ]. The ITC demonstrated statistically significant differences across most weight reduction outcomes, whilst the NMA did not show statistical significance for all of these outcomes. This is likely due to the random effect model being selected for most NMA outcomes, while an ITC does not account for random effects between trials; therefore, the interpretations based on the confidence intervals (ITC) and credible intervals (NMA) may differ. However, point estimates are similar across both analyses, further underlining the credibility of the estimated effect sizes. Finally, the finding of statistically significantly greater weight reduction for tirzepatide versus semaglutide is further supported by a cohort study which found a greater average 1-year weight reduction for tirzepatide versus semaglutide based on real-world evidence [ 24 ].

Strengths:
The NMA was conducted based on an SLR conforming to Cochrane principles, meaning that the evidence informing the analysis was systematically identified. Additionally, all included studies were RCTs, thereby reducing within-trial bias. A heterogeneity assessment ensured all studies were comparable in terms of study design and patient populations. The included studies had global representation, suggesting that the NMA findings are generalisable across multiple geographies. Furthermore, comparisons were based on a network of studies reporting on all relevant OMMs in the population of interest, which is a wider scope compared with previous head-to-head trials, indirect treatment comparisons and cohort studies [ 23 ,  24 ] but a narrower scope compared with previous NMAs [ 21 ,  22 ].
Robust NMA analyses were conducted, with methodology aligned with key guidance documents [ 30 – 33 ]. Both fixed and random effects models were fitted for each outcome, with informative priors used for between-study standard deviation where required, allowing for the selection of the most appropriate model. Efficacy outcome analyses were performed for both the efficacy and treatment regimen estimand, and were generally aligned, suggesting that the overall results are broadly applicable to the full trial cohort as well as to those strictly adhering to treatment.

Limitations:
The SLR was restricted to publications in English. Therefore, relevant publications in other languages may have been missed. Although the trials were mostly well balanced regarding treatment effect modifiers, there were some differences between the trials in terms of sex, race and obesity-related complications. Furthermore, only one timepoint was used for each study, despite some studies reporting on a range of timepoints. Therefore, this analysis does not capture fluctuations in relative treatment effect over the course of the follow-up. Additionally, there was some heterogeneity in follow-up durations across the trials, ranging from week 52 to 72. However, this heterogeneity was considered to be of limited clinical relevance due to the plateau of key outcomes around week 52.
Whilst this NMA addresses a range of efficacy and safety outcomes, the primary goals of the studies included in the NMA were to assess weight reduction and safety outcomes, rather than cardiovascular, hepatic or renal factors. Whilst cardiometabolic risk factors were included as secondary endpoints, providing information on the potential impact of cardiovascular factors, these studies are not designed to assess this impact. Therefore, additional studies are required to assess the impact of cardiovascular, renal and hepatic outcomes, which could be compared in a future NMA.
Care should be taken when interpreting the results of the safety analyses due to possible differences in the collection of safety data based on different reporting methods, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on SURMOUNT-1 and the STEP studies. Finally, due to the small number of events occurring across studies, the results for severe gastrointestinal AEs and discontinuation outcomes were particularly sensitive to small differences in events and allow for broad comparisons only.

Medical Writing/Editorial Assistance:
The authors acknowledge Mathias Hempfling, MSc, from Costello Medical Consulting, Cambridge, UK for medical writing and editorial assistance in preparing this manuscript for publication based on the authors’ input and direction. The authors also acknowledge Mathias Hempfling, MSc, and Anna Zolotor, BSc, from Costello Medical Consulting, Cambridge, UK for statistical support with the analyses. All costs associated with the development of this manuscript were funded by Eli Lilly and Company.