[DOCUMENT METADATA]
Title: Pharmacokinetics and Safety of Single and Multiple Doses of Molnupiravir in Healthy Male Chinese Adults: An Open‐Label, Fixed Sequence, Phase 1 Study
Year: 2026
Type: research_article
Drugs: not specified
Keywords: antiviral, COVID‐19, phase 1, ribonucleoside analog, SARS‐CoV‐2, β‐D‐N4‐hydroxycytidine
Domain: Type 2 Diabetes Drug Interactions
[END METADATA]

[SECTION: ABSTRACT]
ABSTRACT Molnupiravir is an orally administered prodrug of β‐D‐N4‐hydroxycytidine (NHC) that is conditionally approved in China for the treatment of mild to moderate COVID‐19 in nonhospitalized adults at high risk of disease progression. Molnupiravir is rapidly absorbed and hydrolyzed to deliver NHC into systemic circulation. An open‐label, fixed‐sequence, Phase 1 study was conducted to evaluate the tolerability, safety, and pharmacokinetics (PK) following single and multiple (every 12 h for 5.5 days) oral dosing of molnupiravir 800 mg in 16 healthy, male Chinese participants. After multiple doses of molnupiravir, the median time to maximum concentration was 2.0 h for plasma NHC. NHC concentrations generally decreased in a biphasic manner, with a terminal half‐life of 21.9 h, and NHC exposures (i.e., area under the curve and maximum plasma concentration) were similar following single and multiple doses of molnupiravir. No accumulation of NHC in plasma was observed. When compared with historical data from published clinical trials of similar study design, NHC exposure in Chinese participants was marginally higher than that in non‐Asian participants but remained within established clinical bounds. Overall, molnupiravir was generally well‐tolerated. Ten participants (63.5%) experienced at least one adverse event throughout the study, the severity of which was mild or moderate, and none led to treatment discontinuation. There were no clinically meaningful findings in other safety evaluations. These data support use of the standard 5‐day regimen of molnupiravir 800 mg every 12 h without dose adjustment for the treatment of COVID‐19 in the Chinese population.

[SECTION: INTRODUCTION]
Globally, more than 777 million confirmed cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19), resulting from infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome‐coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2), and more than 7 million COVID‐19–related deaths have been reported as of February 2025 [ 1 ]. Of these, nearly 10 million cases and more than 122,000 COVID‐19–related deaths were reported in China [ 1 ]. Following the emergence of the highly transmissible and immune‐evasive Omicron variant in late 2021 [ 2 ], China has experienced multiple COVID‐19 outbreaks. While rates of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection in China were relatively low throughout 2024, an increased incidence of infections caused by the Omicron subvariants JN.1 and XDV.1 have been reported [ 3 ]. By May 2025, a new Omicron variant, NB.1.8.1, was identified as responsible for a resurgence of cases in multiple countries in Asia, including China [ 4 ,  5 ].
The introduction of COVID‐19 vaccination and antiviral agents has reduced the risk of severe outcomes, including death, from COVID‐19 and lessened the burden on healthcare systems by lowering the risk of urgent care clinic and emergency department encounters, COVID‐19–related hospitalization, and intensive care admissions [ 6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ]. However, breakthrough cases in vaccinated persons are common due to continued viral evolution and waning humoral immunity [ 10 ,  11 ,  12 ,  13 ]. Older adults and individuals with underlying medical conditions who become infected with SARS‐CoV‐2 remain at elevated risk of progressing to severe COVID‐19 and death [ 14 ,  15 ,  16 ]. As such, the need persists for safe and effective, self‐administered outpatient interventions for the treatment of COVID‐19. Several self‐administered drugs, including traditional Chinese medicines and small‐molecule antiviral agents (simnotrelvir‐ritonavir, nirmatrelvir‐ritonavir, azvudine, the remdesivir analog, VV116, leritrelvir and molnupiravir), are used for the treatment of patients with mild to moderate COVID‐19 in China [ 17 ].
Molnupiravir is an orally administered, small‐molecule ribonucleoside prodrug of β‐D‐N4‐hydroxycytidine (NHC) that has shown potent preclinical activity against RNA viruses, including SARS‐CoV‐2 and its variants [ 18 ,  19 ,  20 ,  21 ,  22 ,  23 ], and that has a high barrier to the development of resistance [ 20 ,  24 ,  25 ,  26 ]. Following oral administration, molnupiravir is rapidly absorbed and hydrolyzed by carboxylesterases to NHC, which in turn is distributed to various tissue types from systemic circulation and phosphorylated intracellularly to its pharmacologically active triphosphate form (NHC‐TP) [ 27 ,  28 ,  29 ]. NHC‐TP is incorporated into the viral genome by RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase, resulting in the accumulation of deleterious viral RNA errors randomly distributed throughout the viral genome and ultimately leading to nonviable and noninfectious virus [ 30 ,  31 ]. In clinical trials and real‐world studies, early treatment with molnupiravir 800 mg every 12 h for 5 days has been shown to reduce the risk of hospitalization or death in nonhospitalized adults with mild to moderate COVID‐19 at risk for progression to severe disease [ 32 ,  33 ,  34 ,  35 ,  36 ,  37 ]. Molnupiravir was also associated with faster symptom resolution, reduced need for respiratory interventions and use of other healthcare resources, and more rapid elimination of infectious virus compared with placebo [ 8 ,  38 ,  39 ]. Furthermore, because molnupiravir does not induce or inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) enzymes or interact with common drug transporter molecules, it is not associated with the potential for drug–drug interactions [ 40 ]. The pharmacokinetics (PK) of molnupiravir has been extensively studied in clinical trials in which healthy volunteers and patients with COVID‐19 were enrolled [ 41 ,  42 ,  43 ,  44 ,  45 ,  46 ]; however, these trials included relatively few Asian participants, and, thus, PK data in Asian populations are limited. This highlights an important knowledge gap because race and ethnicity can contribute to interindividual differences in exposure and response to drugs [ 47 ]. For instance, individuals of Asian ancestry exhibit approximately twofold higher plasma exposure to rosuvastatin than White individuals, resulting in a lower recommended starting dose for this population [ 47 ]. In a Phase 1 trial, plasma levels of NHC were modestly higher in healthy Japanese participants who received molnupiravir 800 mg every 12 h for 5.5 days, than the levels that had been previously observed in non‐Asian healthy participants [ 48 ]. However, results of a population PK analysis showed no meaningful differences in NHC exposure between Asian and White participants or between Japanese and non‐Japanese participants after accounting for body weight [ 45 ].
Molnupiravir received conditional approval by the China National Medical Products Administration on December 29, 2022, for the treatment of adult patients with mild to moderate COVID‐19 at high risk of progression to severe disease. Because no PK data from individuals from China were available at that time, a Phase 1 study was conducted to determine the PK, safety, and tolerability of molnupiravir after single and multiple oral dosing in healthy Chinese adults. Additionally, the NHC PK in healthy male Chinese participants after single and multiple oral doses of molnupiravir was compared against historical NHC PK data from molnupiravir trials in healthy non‐Chinese participants.

Study Design:
This was a nonrandomized, single‐arm, single‐site, open‐label, fixed‐sequence study (protocol MK‐4482‐009). The study was conducted in accordance with principles of Good Clinical Practice and was approved by the appropriate institutional review boards (Peking University Third Hospital Medical Science Research Ethics Committee; approval date: February 20, 2023) and regulatory agencies. The trial was conducted in China from June 2023 to August 2023. All participants provided written informed consent before enrollment.
Participants completed two fixed treatment sequences (Figure  1 ). In Period 1, participants received a single oral dose of molnupiravir 800 mg on Day 1. After a washout period of at least 96 h, participants proceeded to Period 2, in which they received multiple oral doses of molnupiravir 800 mg (every 12 h for 5.5 days). Each participant was followed up until 14 days after the last dose. Blood samples for PK analysis were collected predose and at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 12, 15, 24, 48, and 72 h after the single dose on Day 1 in Period 1, predose on Days 4 and 5 of Period 2, and predose and at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 12, 15, 24, 48, and 72 h after the last dose on Day 6 in Period 2. Safety was monitored throughout the entire trial (up to 14 days following the last dose in Period 2) by repeated assessment of the frequency of AEs and AEs that led to discontinuation and other safety evaluations (e.g., vital signs, ECGs, and blood chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis). The severity of AEs was assessed by the investigator (mild, moderate, severe), along with seriousness and relationship to study intervention.

Study Participants:
Healthy male Chinese participants aged 18–60 years with a body mass index between 19 and 24 kg/m 2  (inclusive) were eligible for enrollment (Table  S1 ). Key exclusion criteria were a history of any clinically significant medical or psychiatric condition or significant multiple or severe allergies, or a history of drug hypersensitivity.

Outcome Measures:
The primary objective was to characterize the PK of NHC following a single dose of molnupiravir 800 mg or multiple (every 12 h) oral doses in healthy male Chinese participants. The per‐protocol population was used for PK assessments and consisted of all participants who complied with the protocol sufficiently to ensure that generated data would likely exhibit the effects of treatment. All participants who were compliant with the study procedure and who had available data from at least one treatment were included.
The secondary objective was to determine the safety and tolerability of a single dose of molnupiravir 800 mg and of multiple (every 12 h) doses in healthy male Chinese participants. The safety outcome was incidence of AEs and AEs leading to discontinuation. The safety population was used for tolerability assessments and consisted of all participants who received at least one dose of treatment.
The tertiary objective was to compare NHC PK following a single oral dose of molnupiravir 800 mg or multiple doses (every 12 h) in healthy male Chinese participants with historical NHC PK data from non‐Chinese participants who received equivalent dose regimens.

PK Measurements:
Plasma NHC concentrations were determined using a validated high‐performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry method. The analytical range was 1–1000 ng/mL (0.00386–3.86 μM). Values below the lower limit of quantitation were treated as 0. Key PK parameters of interest for the evaluation of single‐dose administration of molnupiravir were maximum plasma concentration ( C 
 max ), time to maximum plasma concentration ( T 
 max ), terminal half‐life ( t 
 ½ ), apparent oral drug clearance (CL/F), apparent volume of distribution (Vz/F), area under the concentration‐time curve from time 0 to 12 h (AUC 0–12 ), AUC from time 0 to the last measurable time point (AUC 0–last ), and AUC from time 0 to infinity (AUC 0–inf ). For the evaluation of multiple dose administration of molnupiravir, the key PK parameters were  C 
 max ,  T 
 max ,  t 
 ½ , apparent oral drug clearance at steady state (CLss/F), Vz/F, AUC 0–12 , AUC 0–last , and AUC 0‐inf  following the last dose, trough concentration ( C 
 trough ), and accumulation ratio on  C 
 max  and AUC 0–12 .

Statistical Analysis:
PK parameter values were determined using noncompartmental modeling methods in Phoenix WinNonlin (version 8.1).  C 
 max ,  T 
 max , time to last quantifiable concentration ( T 
 last ), and  C 
 trough  values were obtained directly from the plasma concentration‐time data. AUCs were calculated using the linear‐up, log‐down method. The apparent  t 
 1/2  was calculated as the quotient of the natural log (ln) of 2 and λz (ln [2]/λz), where λz is the apparent first‐order terminal elimination rate constant. The accumulation ratio was calculated based on  C 
 max  and AUC 0–12  on Day 6 of Period 2 versus Day 1 of Period 1.
For each PK parameter, values were natural‐log transformed and evaluated with separate linear mixed‐effects models containing a fixed effect for day and a random effect for participant. Ninety‐five percent CIs for the least‐squares means (LSMs) by day were constructed on the natural log scale and calculated based on the  t  distribution. Exponentiation of the LSM and lower and upper limits of these CIs yielded estimates for the population GMs and CIs about the GMs on the original scale. The LSM differences (Day 6 of Period 2 versus Day 1 of Period 1) and 90% CIs from this model were back‐transformed to obtain the GM accumulation ratio (Day 6 of Period 2 versus Day 1 of Period 1) and 90% CI for AUC 0–12  and  C 
 max . Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the frequency of AEs and laboratory safety data, by period and in total.

Comparison of NHC PK Between Chinese and Non‐Chinese Participants:
A comparison of NHC exposure measures (i.e.,  C 
 max and  AUC 0–12 ) between Chinese participants (from the current trial), Japanese participants (historical data), and non‐Asian participants (historical data) is presented in Table  2 . The  C 
 max  and AUC 0–12  GMRs (90% CI) for Japanese participants compared with Chinese participants following a single or multiple oral doses of molnupiravir 800 mg ranged from 1.03 (0.85–1.25) to 1.06 (0.95–1.18) without body weight adjustment and from 0.96 (0.83–1.11) to 1.02 (0.83–1.26) with body weight adjustment (Table  2 ). The  C 
 max  and AUC 0–12  GMRs (90% CI) for non‐Asian participants compared with Chinese participants following a single or multiple oral doses of molnupiravir 800 mg ranged from 0.67 (0.54–0.83) to 0.77 (0.67–0.90) without body weight adjustment and from 0.83 (0.71–0.96) to 0.87 (0.78–0.97) with body weight adjustment (Table  2 ).

Study Population:
Sixteen participants were enrolled, all of whom completed the study and were included in the PK and safety analyses (Figure  S1 ). The median age (range) was 29.0 years (18–42 years), mean body weight was 66.4 kg (standard deviation [SD], 8.19), and mean body mass index was 22.2 kg/m 2  (SD, 1.28).

NHC PK in Healthy Male Chinese Participants:
The arithmetic mean plasma concentration‐time profiles of NHC following single and multiple oral doses of molnupiravir are shown in Figures  2  and  3 , respectively. Summary PK statistics of NHC in plasma following single and multiple oral doses of molnupiravir are presented in Table  1 .
Following a single dose of molnupiravir 800 mg, plasma NHC was detectable in all participants within 0.50 h, with a median (min, max)  T 
 max  of 1.50 h (1.00, 2.00). NHC subsequently decreased in a biphasic manner, with a geometric mean (GM) (geometric coefficient of variation)  t 
 ½  of 12.0 h (23.1%). In three participants (18.8%), NHC concentrations were below the lower limit of quantitation before the 48‐h time point.
Following multiple doses of molnupiravir 800 mg every 12 h for 5.5 days, the median (min, max)  T 
 max  of NHC in plasma was 2.00 h (1.00, 2.50). NHC concentrations decreased in a biphasic manner, with a GM (geometric coefficient of variation) terminal  t 
 ½  of 21.9 h (8.8%). NHC exposure (i.e., both AUC and  C 
 max ) following multiple doses of molnupiravir every 12 h for 5.5 days was similar to exposure after a single dose of molnupiravir (Figure  3 ). The geometric mean ratios (GMRs; Day 6 of Period 2 vs. Day 1 of Period 1) and 90% CIs of the accumulation ratios for  C 
 max  and AUC 0–12  were 0.98 (90% CI: 0.87–1.09) and 0.99 (90% CI: 0.95–1.04), respectively (Table  1 ).

Safety Outcomes:
Ten participants (63.5%) reported at least one adverse event (AE) during the study, but only six participants (37.5%) reported an AE considered by the investigator to be drug related (Table  3 , Table  S2 ). Following a single oral dose of molnupiravir, three participants (18.8%) experienced one or more AEs, all determined by the investigator to be drug related (abdominal pain and constipation occurred in one participant each, and one participant experienced increased alanine aminotransferase and increased aspartate aminotransferase). Following multiple doses of molnupiravir, nine participants (56.3%) experienced at least one AE (regardless of relationship to study intervention) and four (25.0%) experienced at least one drug‐related AE (abdominal pain and an abnormal renal function test result both occurred in one participant, and constipation was reported in two participants). Most of the reported AEs after a single or multiple oral doses of molnupiravir occurred only in one participant, with the exception of pollakiuria, which occurred in seven participants (43.8%; none considered drug related), constipation, which occurred in three participants (18.8%; all considered drug related), and abdominal pain, which occurred in two participants (12.5%; all considered drug related). All reported AEs were mild, and all but one (noise in the joints experienced by one participant following multiple doses of molnupiravir) had resolved by study completion (14 days since last dose). No serious AEs, deaths, or drug discontinuations were reported.
Except for laboratory value–based AEs (increased alanine aminotransferase, increased aspartate aminotransferase, increased blood creatine phosphokinase, and abnormal renal function test result;  n  = 1 for all), there were no other clinically meaningful abnormalities seen with routine chemistry and hematology tests. Although some results from the hematology testing fell outside the normal ranges for those laboratory tests, they were minor variations and not deemed to be of clinical importance by the investigator. There were no other clinically meaningful findings in laboratory assessments, vital signs, or electrocardiographic (ECG) safety parameter values in the study.

[SECTION: DISCUSSION]
This is the first prospective clinical trial in which the PK of orally administered molnupiravir and its active metabolite NHC was evaluated specifically in Chinese participants (i.e., male healthy volunteers). NHC appeared rapidly in plasma and reached  C 
 max  within 1.5 h after a single dose of molnupiravir and 2 h after multiple doses; these findings are consistent with data from previous clinical studies in healthy participants and patients with COVID‐19 in which median  T 
 max  ranged from 1 to 2 h [ 41 ,  42 ,  43 ,  44 ,  48 ]. Similar to the PK profile observed in other Phase 1 studies in healthy participants [ 41 ,  42 ,  48 ], plasma concentrations of NHC generally decreased in a biphasic manner, with a terminal  t 
 ½  of 12 h after a single dose of molnupiravir and 21.9 h after multiple doses. The difference in estimated  t 
 ½  of NHC in plasma following a single dose of molnupiravir and after multiple doses is likely because the NHC concentrations following multiple doses remained above the lower limit of quantification through a 72‐h period for all participants, enabling a better characterization of the terminal  t 
 ½  of NHC. Following administration of molnupiravir 800 mg every 12 h for 5.5 days, there was minimal to no accumulation of NHC, based on the accumulation ratios for NHC AUC 0–12  and NHC  C 
 max , a finding that was also observed in previous studies [ 41 ,  42 ,  48 ]. As described in previous Phase 1 studies, plasma NHC demonstrates linear, dose‐proportional PK across the dose range studied (up to 1600 mg) [ 41 ,  42 ,  48 ], suggesting a low risk of PK differences across ethnic groups due to saturable metabolic or clearance pathways.
To evaluate whether NHC exposure following administration of multiple doses of molnupiravir 800 mg every 12 h differed between Chinese participants and those from other ethnic groups, the results from this study were compared with historical data from comparable Phase 1 studies (also assessing the standard molnupiravir dose of 800 mg every 12 h) conducted in healthy participants who were not from China. The AUC 0–12  and  C 
 max  were comparable between Chinese and Japanese participants. Conversely, the AUC 0–12  and  C 
 max  of Chinese participants were higher than those of non‐Asian participants. Population PK modeling suggests that body weight affects NHC exposure [ 45 ], and the mean body weight of the participants in the current study was lower (66.4 kg) than in previous studies in which non‐Asian participants (76.2 kg and 69.6 kg, respectively) were enrolled [ 41 ,  42 ]. After adjusting for these differences in body weight, a trend toward higher NHC exposure in Chinese participants than in non‐Asian participants remained (i.e., the GMRs of AUC and  C 
 max  remained less than 1). However, the modestly higher NHC exposures observed in Chinese participants were within the established upper clinical exposure level (68,000 nM·h or 17,627 ng·h/mL for AUC) for NHC, reflecting the range of plasma NHC exposure levels that have been well tolerated based on exposure‐response modeling of clinical data [ 45 ]. These results are consistent with previous data that showed greater NHC exposure levels in Japanese participants than in non‐Asian participants; however, these results were likely due to differences in body weight between the analyzed populations, as no clear differences were observed after accounting for body weight. Together, these results provide additional evidence that there are no racial or ethnic differences in the PK of molnupiravir in the populations studied.
Molnupiravir was generally well tolerated in these healthy male volunteers following a single oral dose and after multiple oral doses. All AEs, including those that the investigator determined to be related to molnupiravir, were mild or moderate, and none led to treatment discontinuation. Although pollakiuria was by far the most frequently reported AE in the current study, no instances of this AE were considered to be drug related. Because participants were in a new environment and the trial was conducted during the summer, the transient functional pollakiuria was likely attributed to increased fluid intake. Constipation and abdominal pain were the most frequently reported drug‐related AEs with molnupiravir (experienced by three [18.8%] and two [12.5%] participants, respectively). There were no serious AEs or deaths, and there were no clinically meaningful trends in clinical laboratory values, vital signs, or ECGs. The observed safety profile was comparable to that observed in non‐Chinese participants from previous Phase 1 studies in healthy volunteers in which molnupiravir was assessed at the same daily dose (i.e., 800 mg every 12 h) for up to 10.5 days and in patients with COVID‐19 from clinical trials evaluating the standard molnupiravir dose regimen of 800 mg every 12 h for 5 days [ 33 ,  41 ,  42 ,  44 ,  46 ,  48 ]. No new safety signals or concerns with molnupiravir were identified.
Molnupiravir can be administered without dose adjustment based on age, sex, body size, and mild to moderate renal or mild hepatic impairment [ 40 ,  45 ,  46 ]. Additionally, because molnupiravir has no known drug–drug interactions, it can be administered concomitantly with any other medications without the need for dose adjustment [ 40 ]. Molnupiravir therefore provides an important option for outpatient treatment in high‐risk patients with COVID‐19 for whom other treatments may not be available, feasible, or clinically appropriate.
The current study was limited by the small sample size and the inclusion of healthy participants rather than patients with COVID‐19. Furthermore, only male participants were enrolled in the study, which could limit the generalizability of these findings; however, previous data including an integrated population PK analysis based on data from a broad range of populations indicate that there is no meaningful difference in the PK of NHC between men and women [ 40 ,  41 ,  45 ]. Therefore, it is reasonable to apply the findings from this study more broadly to female individuals. Finally, the current study is limited by the use of cross‐trial comparisons, which can be misleading due to inherent differences between studies that may confound direct comparisons [ 49 ].
In summary, molnupiravir was generally well tolerated in healthy Chinese participants, and no new safety issues were identified. The NHC exposure observed in Chinese participants was marginally higher than the exposure previously reported in non‐Asian individuals, but remained within the established clinical bounds for NHC. Overall, these data support the use of the standard regimen of molnupiravir for the treatment of COVID‐19 (i.e., 800 mg every 12 h for 5 days) in the Chinese population without the need for dose adjustment.

Author Contributions:
J.Z., B.Y., W.Z., F.S., B.M.M., M.H.C., S.A.S., and H.L. wrote the manuscript. B.Y., Y.Z., S.A.S., and H.L. designed the research. J.Z., D.Z., Z.L., B.Y., Y.Z., F.S., and H.L. performed the research. B.Y. and W.Z. analyzed the data.

Funding:
Funding for this research was provided by Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, and MSD, China.

Conflicts of Interest:
B.M.M., M.H.C., and S.A.S. are current or former employees of Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, who may own stock and/or hold stock options in Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA. B.Y., Y.Z., W.Z., and F.S. are employees of MSD China, who may own stock and/or hold stock options in Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA. All other authors declared no competing interests for this work.

Data Availability Statement:
The data sharing policy, including procedures and restrictions, of Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA (MSD), is available at  https://externaldatasharing‐msd.com/ .